FOREWORD This is the second iteration of preparing our own courseware material, after successful completion of a similar task undertaken a few years ago.
These contents have been carefully prepared and should serve as excellent auxiliary material for both instructors and students.
The Special Academic Group, Autonomy (SAGA) was formed for the sole purpose of preparing courseware contents primarily in the first-year theory subjects; a few second-year subjects were also included.
The subjects for the first year were - Basic Electrical Engineering, Basic Electronics Engineering, Computer Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms, Engineering Mathematics I and II, Engineering Physics, Engineering Chemistry, Constitution of India, Environmental Science and Engineering and Communicative and Technical English.
For the second year, the subjects for which courseware material was prepared were Analog Electronic Circuits, Digital Systems Design, Circuit Theory and Measurements and Instruments.
Faculty members from all the departments contributed to the task.
They were, in no particular order, Nalini Singh, Bimal Meher, Saumyaranjan Dash, Mukti Routray, Susmita Biswal, Manasa Dash, Bipin Tripathy, Sibasankar Nayak, Janmejay Senapati, Subrat Sahu, Pradeep Moharana, Rupambika Pattanaik, Dhananjay Tripathy, Jagadish Patra, Sachin Das, Deepak Ranjan Nayak, Amulya Roul, Bodhisattva Dash, Sanghamitra Das, Gyana Ranjan Biswal, Nibedita Swain and Rajan Mishra.
The entire group worked diligently to successfully complete the task which included a peer review of the material.
I take this opportunity to thank all the members of the SAGA group for a job well done.
I sincerely hope that this courseware material comes in handy and is utilized to the fullest extent.
These are readily available additional resources prepared in accordance with the Silicon autonomy syllabus, to complement textbooks and classroom lectures.
If there are any errors, I would be grateful if they are brought to my notice so that we can correct them in subsequent versions.
Dr. Jaideep Talukdar, Principal Silicon Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar December 2020 : CONSTITUTION OF INDIA WHAT IS A CONSTITUTION?
Constitution is a document which consists of a number of articles about the state, specifying how the state is to be constituted and what norms it should follow.
Constitution of India is the supreme law of our country.
It establishes the structure, procedures, powers and duties of the government and spells out the Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles of State Policy and Duties of citizens.
Constitution of India was passed by the Constituent Assembly on 26th November 1949 and it came into effect on 26th January 1950.
Constitution of India declares the Union of India to be a sovereign, democratic republic, assuring its citizens of justice, equality and liberty and to promote among them all fraternity.
It is the longest written constitution in the world which contained 395 articles, 22 parts and 8 schedules at the time of commencement.
There are 1, 17,369 words in the English version.
Besides the English version, there is an official Hindi translation of our constitution.
Dr. Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar was the Chairman of the Constitution Drafting Committee who was the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution.
Major part of India was under British rule from 1858 to 1947.
In this period there was the freedom movement to gain independence from the foreign rule.
The movement ended in the formation of India and Pakistan on 15th August 1947.
Then we start to govern our country ourselves according to our own constitution from 26th January 1950.
WHY DO WE NEED A CONSTITUTION?
1.
A constitution provides a set of basic rules which allow for minimum co-ordination among members of a society.
2.
It specifies who has the power to make decisions in the society.
It decides how the government will be constituted.
3.
Constitution sets some limits on the power of government.
Fundamental rights are possessed by the citizens of our country.
No government is allowed to violate such rights.
Constitution protects the fundamental rights of citizens.
Citizens are protected from being arrested arbitrarily and for no reason.
This is one limitation on the power of government.
Citizens have the right to freedom of speech, freedom of conscience, freedom of association, freedom to conduct a trade or business etc.
But these rights can be limited during national emergency and under certain circumstances, these rights may be withdrawn.
4.
A constitution enables the government to fulfill the aspirations of a society and create conditions for a just society.
These are some of the needs for which most countries have a constitution.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES OF CONSTITUTION OF INDIA: The constitution of India has been evolved as follows: 1) ACTS OF BRITISH PARLIAMENT BEFORE 1935: After the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the British parliament took over the reign of India from the British East India Company, and British India came under the direct rule of the British crown.
The British parliament passed the Government of India Act of 1858 to this effect, which set up the structure of British Government in India.
It established the office of the Secretary of State for India in England.
The British parliament would exercise its rule through the Secretary of State for India.
The Secretary of State for India was aided by an Executive Council in India.
This council consisted of high officials of the British Government.
The India Councils Act of 1861 provided for a Legislative Council.
The Legislative Council consisted of the members of the Executive Council and non- official members.
The India Councils Act of 1892 established provincial Legislatures and increased the powers of the Legislative Council.
These acts increased the representation of Indians in the government but it was limited in its powers.
The Government of India Acts 1909 and 1919 further expanded the participation of Indians in the government.
2) GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT 1935: The provisions of this Act were never implemented fully but it had a great impact on the Constitution of India.
Many key features of our constitution are directly taken from this Act.
The federal structure of government, provincial autonomy, bicameral legislature consisting of a federal assembly and a council of states, separation of legislative power between center and provinces are some of the provisions of the Government of India Act 1935 which are present in our Constitution.
3) THE CABINET MISSION PLAN: In 1946, at the initiative of British Prime Minister Clement Attlee, a Cabinet Mission for India was formulated.
Its objective was to discuss and finalise plans for the transfer of power from British Government to Indian leadership.
The Cabinet Mission discussed the framework of the constitution and laid down the procedure to be followed by the Constitution Drafting Committee.
Elections for the British Indian provinces were completed by August 1946.
The Constituent Assembly first met and began to work on 9th December 1946.
4) INDIAN INDEPENDENCE ACT 1947: The Indian Independence Act came into force on 18th July 1947.
According to this Act, the British India was divided into two countries namely, India and Pakistan.
The Constituent Assembly was also divided into two for the separate countries.
The Act relieved the British parliament of any further rights towards India or Pakistan and granted sovereignty over the lands to the respective Constituent Assemblies.
When the Constitution of India came into force on 26th January 1950, India became a Sovereign Democratic Republic.
5) CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY: The constitution was drafted by the Constitution Drafting Committee on behalf of the Constituent Assembly.
Jawaharlal Nehru, C. Rajgopalchari, Rajendra Prasad, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, Shyam Prasad Mukherjee and Nalini Ranjan Ghosh were some important figures in the Constituent Assembly.
Rajendra Prasad was elected President of the Constituent Assembly.
6) DRAFTING OF THE CONSTITUTION: On 14th August 1947, the Constituent Assembly proposed for forming various committees like Fundamental Rights Committee, the Union Powers Committee and Union Constitution Committee.
On 29th August 1947 the Constituent Assembly appointed Dr. Ambedkar as the Chairman and six others as the members of the Constitution Drafting Committee.
A draft Constitution was submitted by the Drafting Committee to the Constituent Assembly on 4th November 1949.
Then the Constituent Assembly met for several days before adopting the Constitution.
After many deliberations and some modifications, the members of the Constituent Assembly signed two hand written copies of the document (one each in Hind and English) on 24th January 1950.
On 26th January 1950, Constitution of India became the law of all the Indian lands.
The constitution consists of a preamble, 25 parts containing 448 articles, 12 schedules, and more than 101 amendments till today.
SALIENT FEATURES OF INDIAN CONSTITUTION: Following features of Indian constitution distinguish it from other constitutions.
1.
LENGTHIEST WRITTEN CONSTITUTION: The constitution of India is the lengthiest of all the written constitutions of the world.
Originally, Indian constitution contained a preamble, 395 Articles, 22 parts and 8 schedules.
Presently after various amendments it consists of a preamble, 448 Articles, 25 parts and 12 schedules.
Following four factors have contributed to the elephantine size of our constitution.
i) Geographical factors, i.e., the vastness of the country and its diversity.
ii) Historical factors, e.g., the influence of the Government of India Act, 1935, which was bulky.
(iii) Single constitution for both the center and the states except Jammu and Kashmir.
(iv) Dominance of legal luminaries in the constituent Assembly.
2.
DRAWN FROM VARIOUS SOURCES: The constitution of India has borrowed most of its provisions from other constitutions as well as from the Government of India Act 1935.
Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy are derived from the American and Irish constitutions respectively.
The Principle of Cabinet Government and the relations between the Executive and the Legislature have been drawn from the British Constitution.
The other provisions of the constitution have been drawn from the constitutions of Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, South Africa, USSR and so on.
The Emergency Powers, Federal Scheme, Governors, Judiciary, Public Service Commissions and most of the administrative details are drawn from Government of India Act 1935.
3.
BOTH RIGID AND FLEXIBLE: The constitution of India is neither rigid nor flexible but a synthesis of both.
Article 368 provides for following types of amendments: i) Some provisions can be amended by a special majority of the parliament, i.e., a two third majority of the members of each house present and voting, and a majority (that is more than 50 percent), of the total membership of each house.
ii) Some other provisions can be amended by a special majority of the parliament and with the approval by half of the total states.
At the same time, some provisions of the constitution can be amended by a simple majority of the parliament.
4.
FEDERAL SYSTEM WITH UNITARY BIAS: The constitution of India establishes a federal system of government which contains all the features of a federation, viz., two governments, division of powers, written constitution, supremacy of constitution, rigidity of constitution, independent judiciary and bicameralism.
However, the Indian constitution also contains a large number of unitary features, viz., a strong centre, single constitution, single citizenship, flexibility of constitution, integrated judiciary, appointment of state governor by the centre, all India services, emergency provisions, and so on.
5.
PARLIAMENTARY FROM OF GOVERNMENT: The constitution of India has opted for the British parliamentary system of Government.
The constitution establishes the parliamentary system not only at the centre but also in the states.
Some of the features of parliamentary government in India are: i)Presence of nominal and real executives; ii) Majority party rule, iii) Collective responsibility of the executive to the legislature, iv) Membership of the ministers in the legislature, v) Leadership of the prime minister or the chief minister, vi) Dissolution of the lower house (Lok Sabha or Legislative Assembly) 6.
INTEGRATED AND INDEPENDENT JUDICIARY: The Indian Constitution establishes a judicial system which is integrated as well as independent.
The Supreme Court is at the top of the integrated judicial system.
Below it, there are high courts at the state level and under a high court, there will be district courts and other lower courts.
This single system of courts enforces both the central laws as well as the state laws.
The Supreme Court is the highest court of appeal and it is the guarantor of the fundamental rights of the citizens.
It is the guardian of the constitution.
The constitution has made various provisions to ensure the independence of judiciary.
7.
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS: Indian constitution guarantees six fundamental rights to all the citizens such as Right to Equality, Right to Freedom, Right against Exploitation, Right to freedom of Religion, Cultural and Educational Rights, and Right to Constitutional Remedies.
The fundamental rights are meant for promoting political democracy.
These are the limitations on the executive and arbitrary laws of the legislature.
They are justiciable in nature, that is, they are enforceable by the courts for their violation.
The aggrieved person can directly go to supreme court which can issue the writs of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, certiorari and quo warranto for the restoration of his rights.
Fundamental rights are also subject to reasonable restrictions.
They can be curtailed by the parliament through a constitutional amendment act and can also be suspended during a national emergency.
8.
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY: The Directive Principles of State Policy is a 'novel feature' of the Indian Constitution which has been taken from the Irish Constitution.
They seek to establish a 'welfare state' in India.
These are not enforceable by the courts for their violation.
The philosophy behind the Directive Principles of State Policy is that the central and state governments should follow these principles while they frame their policies.
9.
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES: The fundamental duties were added during the internal emergency (1975-77).
These are namely, to respect the constitution, national flag and national anthem; to protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of the country; to promote the spirit of brotherhood amongst all the people; to preserve our rich heritage and so on.
It is a reminder to citizens that while enjoying their rights they should be conscious about their duties.
10.
A SECULAR STATE: The constitution of India stands for a secular state.
There is no official or state religion in India.
Being a secular state, India treats all its citizens alike and give them equal opportunities.
India guarantees, constitutionally, freedom of religion to all persons.
No discrimination can be made on the basis of religion, faith, caste, colour and sex.
Every citizen is equal before law.
It guarantees right to religious minorities to maintain their own language and to establish educational institutions of their choice.
11.
UNIVERSAL ADULT FRANCHISE: The Indian constitution adopts universal adult franchise as a basis of elections to the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies.
Every citizen who is not less than 18 years of age has a right to vote without any discrimination of caste, race, religion, sex, literacy, wealth, and so on.
The voting age was reduced to 18 years from 21 years by the 61st constitutional Amendment Act of 1988.
The introduction of universal adult franchise by the constitution-makers was highly remarkable in view of the vast size of the country, its huge population, high poverty, social inequality and overwhelming illiteracy.
Universal adult franchise makes democracy broad-based, enhances the self-respect and prestige of the common men and upholds the principle of equality.
12.
SINGLE CITIZENSHIP: Indian constitution provides for a single citizenship, that is the Indian citizenship.
In countries like U.S.A, each person is not only a citizen of USA but also a citizen of the particular state to which he belongs.
In India, all citizens irrespective of the state in which they are born or reside enjoy the same political and civil rights of citizenship all over the country and no discrimination is made between them.
13.
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS: Our constitution contains emergency provisions to enable the President to safe guard the sovereignty, unity, integrity and security of the country, the democratic political system and the constitution.
There are three types of emergencies: National emergency, State emergency and Financial emergency.
During an emergency, the central government becomes all-powerful and the states go into the total control of the centre.
It converts the federal structure into a unitary one without an amendment of the constitution.
This kind of transformation of the political system from federal (during normal times) to unitary (during emergency) is a unique feature of the Indian constitution.
14.
THREE-TIER GOVERNMENT: Originally, the Indian constitution provided for dual government, i.e., central and state governments.
Later, by constitutional Amendment we have added a third-tier of government, i.e., Local government.
The 73rd and 74th Amendment Acts of 1992 gave constitutional recognition to the panchayats (rural local governments) and municipalities (urban local governments).
CRITICISMS OF THE CONSTITUTION: 1.
A BORROWED CONSTITUTION: The critics described Indian constitution as a 'borrowed constitution' or a 'bag of borrowings' or a 'hotch-potch' constitution' or a 'patch work' of several documents of the world constitutions.
Parliamentary form of government is borrowed from the British constitution while federalism and judicial review is borrowed from the US constitution.
This criticism is unfair because, the framers of the constitution modified the features borrowed from other constitutions for our suitability and avoided their faults.
So, if it is a 'patch work' it is a 'beautiful patch work'.
2.
ELEPHANTINE SIZE: The constitution of India is criticised as the lengthiest and detailed constitutional document.
According to Sir Ivor Jennings, a British constitutionalist, the provisions borrowed for Indian constitution were not well selected for which it was too long and complicated.
3.
PARADISE OF THE LAWYERS: According to critics, the Indian constitution is too legalistic and very complicated.
They opined that the legal language adopted in the constitution makes it complex.
Sir Ivor Jennings called it a "Lawyer's paradise''.
Only experienced lawyers can understand the implications of the legal language.
4.
UN-INDIAN 'or' ANTI-INDIAN: According to the critics, the Indian Constitution is 'un-Indian' or 'anti-Indian' because it does not reflect the political traditions and the spirit of India.
They said that the foreign nature of the constitution makes it unsuitable to the Indian situation.
In this context, a member of the Constituent Assembly, commented, "We wanted the music of veena or sitar, but here we have the music of an English band.
5.
A CARBON COPY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT 1935: The critics said that the framers of the constitution have included a large number of provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935 in our constitution.
Hence, they called the constitution as a carbon copy of the Government of India Act.
1935 or an amended version of the Govt.
of India Act.
1935.
PREAMBLE OF INDIAN CONSTITUTION: The term 'preamble' refers to the introduction or preface to the constitution.
It contains the summary of the constitution.
The preamble has been amended only once by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act,1976, and three words: socialist, secular and integrity have been added.
FEATURES OF THE PREAMBLE: The preamble reveals the following four important features: 1.
Source of authority of the Constitution: The preamble states that the Constitution derives its authority from the people of India.
2.
Nature of India State: It declares India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic.
3.
Objectives of the constitution: It specifies justice, liberty, equality and fraternity as the objectives.
4.
Date of adoption of the constitution: It specifies 26th November 1949 as the date.
KEY WORDS IN PREAMBLE: 1.
SOVEREIGN: The word 'sovereign' implies that India is neither dependent on any country nor a dominion of any other nation, but an independent state.
There is no authority above it.
It is free to conduct its internal and external affairs.
Being a sovereign state, India can either acquire a foreign territory or surrender a part of its territory to a foreign state.
2.
SOCIALIST: Indian socialism is a 'democratic socialism'/ 'state socialism' and not a 'communistic socialism'.
Communistic socialism involves nationalization of all means of production and distribution and the abolition of private property but in our democratic socialism, there is 'mixed economy' where both public and private sector co-exist.
It aims to end poverty, ignorance, disease and inequality of opportunity.
3.
SECULAR: The term 'secular' was added by the 42nd constitutional Amendment Act of 1976.
There is a right to freedom of religion in our constitution.
The Indian constitution represents the positive concept of secularism, i.e., all religions in our country have the same status and support from the state.
4.
DEMOCRATIC: In democracy, supreme power is possessed by the people.
Democracy is of two types: Direct and Indirect.
In direct democracy, the people exercise their supreme power directly as in the case of Switzerland.
There are four tools of direct democracy, namely, Referendum, Initiative, Recall and Plebiscite.
In indirect democracy, the representatives are elected by the people.
The elected representative exercise the power and they carry on the government and make laws.
Indirect democracy is also known as representative democracy which is of two kinds: Parliamentary and Presidential.
The Indian constitution provides for Parliamentary Democracy.
In this democracy, the Executive is responsible to the Legislature for all its policies and actions.
Universal adult franchise, periodic elections, rule of law, independence of judiciary, and absence of discrimination are our democratic features.
5.
REPUBLIC: In a democracy the organisational structure can be classified into two categories: Monarchy and Republic.
In a monarchy, the head of the state (usually king or queen) enjoys a hierarchy position, that is he/she comes into office through succession, e.g., Britain.
In a republic, the head of the state is always elected directly or indirectly for a fixed period, e.g, USA.
The term republic in our preamble indicates that India has an elected head called the President.
He is elected indirectly for a fixed period of five years.
A republic also means two more things: i) vesting of political sovereignty in the people and not in a single individual like a king; ii) all public offices are opened to every citizen without any discrimination.
6.
JUSTICE: The term 'justice' in the preamble implies social justice, economic justice and political justice which are secured through various provisions of Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State policy.
Social justice denotes the equal treatment of all citizens without any social distinction based on caste, colour, race, religion, sex and so on.
Economic justice denotes the non-discrimination between people on the basis of economic factors.
It involves the elimination of glaring inequalities in wealth, income and property.
Political justice implies that all citizens should have equal political rights, equal access to all political offices and equal voice in the government.
7.
LIBERTY: The term 'liberty' means the absence of control on the activities of individuals.
It also means providing opportunities for the development of individual personalities.
The preamble secures liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship to all citizens of India through fundamental rights which are enforceable in court of law, in case of violation.
Liberty is very essential for the successful functioning of Indian democratic system.
However, liberty does not mean 'license' to do what one likes, and has to be enjoyed within the limitations mentioned in the constitution.
8.
EQUALITY: The term 'equality' means the absence of special privileges to any section of the society, and the provision of adequate opportunities for all individuals without any discrimination.
The preamble secures equality of status and opportunity to all citizens of India.
There are civic equality, political equality and economic equality.
To ensure civic equality, the following provisions are there in the fundamental Rights: i) Equality before law ii) No discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste sex or people of birth.
iii) Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.
iv) Abolition of untouchability v) Abolition of titles.
There are two provisions in the constitution to achieve political equality: i) No one is ineligible for inclusion in electoral rolls on grounds of religion, race, caste or sex.
ii) Elections to the Lok Sabha and the state assemblies are on the basis of adult suffrage.
The Directive Principles of State Policy secures equal right to an adequate means of livelihood and equal pay for equal work to men and women.
This is to achieve economic equality.
9.
FRATERNITY: It means a sense of brotherhood.
The constitution promotes this feeling of fraternity by the system of single citizenship.
Also, according to the Fundamental Duties, it is the duty of every citizen to promote harmony and brotherhood among us.
The preamble declares that fraternity has to assure the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation.
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PREAMBLE: The preamble represents the basic philosophy on which the constitution of India is based.
It contains the noble vision of the Constituent Assembly.
It reflects the dreams and ambitions of the founding fathers of our constitution.
Preamble of our constitution is the horoscope of our sovereign democratic republic.
It is the most precious part of our constitution.
It is the soul of our constitution and a key to our constitution.
Preamble is the yardstick with which one can measure the worth of our constitution.
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS: The fundamental Rights are in Part - III of Indian constitution from Articles 12 to 35.
The fundamental rights are guaranteed by the constitution to all persons without any discrimination.
They prevent an authoritarian and despotic rule in the country, and protect the liberties and freedoms of the people.
The fundamental Rights are named so because they are guaranteed and protected by the constitution and also, they are essential for the all-round development (material, intellectual, moral and spiritual) of the individuals.
Originally, there were seven Fundamental Rights: 1.
Right to Equality (Articles 14-18) 2.
Right to Freedom (Articles 19-22) 3.
Right against Exploitation (Articles 23-24) 4.
Right to Freedom of Religion (Articles 25-28) 5.
Cultural and Educational Rights (Articles 29-30) 6.
Right to Property (Article-31) 7.
Right to Constitutional Remedies (Article-32) However, the Right to Property was deleted from the list of Fundamental Rights by the 44th Amendment Act, 1978 and became a Legal Right.
So, at present, there are only six Fundamental Rights.
1.
RIGHT TO EQUALITY: Articles 14 to 18 of the constitution describe Right to Equality.
It is the foundation of all other rights and liberties, and guarantees the following: i) EQUALITY BEFORE LAW: Article 14 of the constitution guarantees that all citizens shall be equally protected by the laws of the country.
It means that the state cannot discriminate against a citizen on the basis of caste, creed, colour, sex, religion or place of birth.
ii) SOCIAL EQUALITY AND EQUAL ACCESS TO PUBLIC AREAS: Article 15 of the constitution states that every person shall have equal access to public places like public parks, museums, wells, bathing ghats and temples, etc.
However, the state may make any special provision for the advancements of women and children, socially or educationally backward class, scheduled castes or scheduled tribes.
iii) EQUALITY IN MATTERS OF PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT: Article 16 of the constitution states that the state cannot discriminate against anyone in the matters of employment.
All citizens can apply for government jobs.
There are some exceptions.
The state may reserve posts for the upliftment of backward classes.
iv) ABOLITION OF UNTOUCHABILITY: Article 17 of the constitution abolishes the practice of untouchability.
Practice of untouchability is an offence and anyone doing so is punishable by law.
There is also the provision of penalties for preventing a person from entering a place of worship or from taking water from a tank or a well.
v) ABOLITION OF TITLES: Article 18 of the constitution prohibits the state from conferring any titles.
Citizens of India cannot accept titles from a foreign state.
The British government had created an aristocratic class known as Rai Bahadurs, Khan Bahadurs, etc.
in India which were also abolished.
However, military and academic distinctions can be conferred on the citizens of India.
The awards of Bharat Ratna and Padma Vibhushan cannot be used by the recipient as a title.
2.
RIGHT TO FREEDOM: It is described in articles 19 to 22 of our constitution.
The right to freedom in Article 19 guarantees the following six freedoms: i) Freedom of speech and expression enable an individual to participate in public activities but reasonable restrictions can be imposed in the interest of public order, security of state, decency or morality.
ii) Freedom to assemble peacefully without arms, on which the state can impose reasonable restrictions in the interest of public order, sovereignty and integrity of India.
iii) Freedom to form associations or unions on which the state can impose reasonable restrictions in the interest of public order, morality and sovereignty and integrity of India.
iv) Freedom to move freely throughout India but reasonable restrictions can be imposed in the interest of the public.
v) Freedom to reside and settle in any part of India which is also subject to reasonable restrictions in the interest of general public.
vi) Freedom to practise any profession or to carry on any occupation/trade/business on which the state may impose reasonable restrictions in the interest of general public.
Thus, there is no right to carry on a business which is dangerous or immoral.
According to Article 20, no one can be awarded punishment which is more than what our law prescribes.
According to Article 21, a person's life and personal liberty can only be disputed if that person has committed a crime.
However, the right to life does not include the right to die and hence, suicide or an attempt to suicide is an offence.
The right to primary education is a part of the right to freedom for which the state provides free and compulsory education to children from six to fourteen years of age.
According to Article 22 no one can be arrested without being told the grounds for his arrest.
If arrested, the person has the right to defend himself by a lawyer and the person has to be brought before the magistrate within 24 hours.
The government restricts these freedoms in the interest of the independence, sovereignty and integrity of India.
These freedoms are also automatically suspended during emergency.
3.
RIGHT AGAINST EXPLOITATION: Articles 23 and 24 describe the right against exploitation.
The abolition of trafficking in human beings and forced labour and abolition of employment of children below the age of 14 years in dangerous jobs like factories and mines are explained in these articles.
Child labour is considered as gross violation of the spirit and provisions of the constitution.
4.
RIGHT TO FREEDOM OF RELIGION: Right to freedom of religion has been covered in Articles 25 to 28.
This right provides religious freedom to all citizens of India.
The objective of this right is to maintain the principle of secularism in India.
According to the constitution, all religions are equal before the state and no religion shall be given preference over the other.
Citizens are free to propagate any religion of their choice.
Religious communities can set up charitable institutions of their own but it can also be restricted in the greater interest of the society.
No person shall be compelled to pay taxes for the promotion of a particular religion.
A state-run institution cannot impart education which is pro-religion.
5.
CULTURAL AND EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS: India is a country of many languages, religions, and cultures for which Indian constitution provides special measures in Articles 29 and 30 to protect our cultural and educational rights.
Any community which has a language and a script of its own has the right to conserve and develop them.
No one can be discriminated for admission in state or state-aided institutions.
Any minority or religious community can set up and administer its educational institutions to preserve and develop their own culture.
In granting aid to institutions, the state cannot discriminate against any institution on the basis of the fact that it is run by a minority community.
But the right to administer does not mean that the state cannot interfere in case of maladministration.
6.
RIGHT TO CONSTITUTIONAL REMEDIES: Right to constitutional remedies empowers the citizens to move to a court of law in case of any denial of the fundamental rights.
For instance, in case of imprisonment, the citizen can ask the court to see if it is according to the law of the country.
If the court finds that it is not, the person will have to be freed.
The court can issue various kinds of writs to safeguard the citizen's fundamental rights.
When a national emergency is declared, fundamental rights are suspended by the central government.
CRITICISM OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS: The fundamental rights have been criticised as follows: 1.
EXCESSIVE LIMITATIONS: Fundamental rights are subjected to innumerable exceptions, restrictions, qualifications and explanations.
Hence, the critics remarked that the constitution grants fundamental rights with one hand and takes them away with the other hand.
2.
NO CLARITY: Fundamental Rights are stated in a vague, indefinite and ambiguous manner.
The various words used in describing the fundamental rights like 'public order', 'minorities', 'reasonable restrictions' 'public interest' and so on are not clearly defined.
The language used to describe them is very complicated and beyond the comprehension of the common man.
It is alleged that the constitution was made by the lawyers for the lawyers.
3.
NO PERMANENCY: Fundamental Rights are not untouchable or unchallengeable as the parliament can curtail or abolish them, for example, the abolition of the Fundamental Right to Property in 1978.
Hence, they can become a play tool in the hands of politicians having majority support in the parliament.
4.
SUSPENSION DURING EMERGENCY: The suspension of fundamental rights during the operation of national emergency is another stain on the effectiveness of these rights.
This provision cuts the roots of democratic system in the country.
According to the critics, the fundamental Rights should be enjoyable in all situations: Emergency or No Emergency.
5.
EXPENSIVE REMEDY: The judiciary protects the fundamental rights against the interference of the legislatures and executives.
However, the judicial process is too expensive and obstructs the common man from getting his rights enforced through the courts.
Hence, the critics say that the right to constitutional remedies help mainly the rich people.
SIGNIFICANCE OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS: In spite of the above criticism, the fundamental rights are significant in the following respects: 1.
Fundamental Rights constitute the foundation of democratic system in our country.
2.
They provide necessary conditions for the protection of our people.
3.
They serve as a safeguard of individual liberty.
4.
They facilitate the establishment of rule of law in the country.
5.
They protect the interest of minorities and weaker sections of society.
6.
They strengthen the secular structure of our country.
7.
They check the absolute power of the government.
8.
They lay down the foundation stone of social equality and social justice.
9.
They ensure the dignity and respect of individuals.
10.
They facilitate the participation of people in the political and administrative process.
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES AND ITS LEGAL STATUS: The rights and duties of the citizens are correlative and inseparable.
The original constitution contained only the fundamental rights and not the fundamental duties.
The framers of the constitution did not feel it necessary to incorporate the fundamental duties of the citizens in the constitution.
However, they incorporated the duties of the state in the constitution in the form of Directive Principles of State Policy.
Later by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1976, ten fundamental duties of citizens were added in the constitution as Article 51 A in Part- IV A.
In 2002, one more fundamental duty was added by the 86th Constitutional Amendment Act.
The fundamental duties in the Indian constitution are inspired by the constitution of former USSR.
Most of the constitutions of democratic countries like Australia, Canada, France, Germany and USA do not contain a list of duties of citizens.
Other than Indian constitution, Japanese constitution is the only democratic constitution in the world contain a list of duties of citizens.
The socialist countries give equal importance to fundamental rights and duties of their citizens.
The necessity of fundamental duties was felt during the operation of the internal emergency (1975-1977).
Sardar Swaran Singh Committee recommended the inclusion of Fundamental Duties in the constitution.
LIST OF FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES: The fundamental duties are expected to follow by the citizens as a code of conduct in their actions.
According to Article 51 A, it shall be the duty of every citizen of India: 1) To abide by the constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National flag and the National anthem; 2) To cherish and follow the noble ideals that inspired the national struggle for freedom; 3) To uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India; 4) To defend the country and render national service when called upon to do; 5) To promote harmony and spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional diversities and give up practices derogatory to the dignity of woman; 6) To value and preserve the rich heritage of the country's composite culture; 7) To protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life and to have kindness for living creatures; 8) To develop scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform; 9) To safeguard public property and to renounce violence; 10) To strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of effort and achievement; and 11) To provide opportunities for education to each child between the age of six and fourteen years.
FEATURES OF THE FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES: 1) Some of the fundamental duties are moral duties while others are civic duties.
For instance, appreciating noble ideals of freedom struggle is a moral teaching and respecting the constitution, National Flag and National Anthem is a civic duty.
2) Fundamental duties refer to such values which have been a part of the Indian tradition, mythology, religions and practices.
In other words, they contain a codification of tasks integral to the Indian way of life.
3) The fundamental duties are confined to Indian citizens only and do not extend to foreigners but certain fundamental rights are extended to all persons whether Indian citizens or foreigners.
4) Fundamental duties are non-justiciable.
The constitution does not provide for their direct enforcement by the courts.
There is no legal sanction against their violation.
However, the parliament is free to enforce them by suitable legislation.
CRITICISM OF FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES: The Fundamental Duties have been criticised on the following grounds: 1.
The list of fundamental duties does not cover many other duties like casting vote, paying taxes, family planning and so on.
2.
Some of the fundamental duties are vague, ambiguous and difficult to be understood by the common man.
For example, different interpretation can be given to the phrases like 'noble ideals', 'composite culture', 'scientific temper' and so on.
3.
Fundamental duties have been described by the critics as a moral teaching due to their non-justiciable character.
4.
The critics said that the inclusion of fundamental duties as an addition to Part-IV of the constitution has reduced their value and significance.
Fundamental Duties should have been added after Part-III so as to keep them at par with Fundamental Rights.
SIGNIFICANCE OF FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES: In spite of criticisms, the fundamental duties are significant from the following perspectives: 1.
Fundamental duties serve as a reminder to the citizens that while enjoying their rights, they should also be conscious of duties they owe to their country, their society and to their fellow citizens.
2.
Fundamental duties serve as a warning against the anti-national and anti-social activities like burning the national flag, destroying public property and so on.
3.
Fundamental duties serve as a source of inspiration for the citizens and promote a sense of discipline and commitment among them.
They create a feeling that the citizens are not mere spectators but active participants in the realisation of national goals.
4.
Fundamental duties are enforceable by law.
Hence, the Parliament can impose appropriate punishment for failure to fulfill any of the fundamental duties.
Indira Gandhi, the then Prime Minister, justified the inclusion of Fundamental Duties in the constitution and argued that their inclusion would help to strengthen our democracy.
She also said that people should be conscious of their duties equally as they are conscious of their rights.
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY The Directive Principles of State Policy are enumerated in Part-IV of the constitution from Articles 36 to 51.
The framers of the constitution borrowed this idea from the Irish Constitution.
The Directive Principles of State Policy along with the Fundamental Rights contain the philosophy of the constitution and is the soul of the constitution.
FEATURES OF THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY: 1.
Directive Principles of State Policy denotes the ideals that the state should keep in mind while formulating policies and enacting laws.
These are constitutional recommendations to the state in legislative, executive and administrative matters.
2.
The Directive Principles of State Policy is similar to the 'Instrument of Instructions' specified in the Government of India Act of 1935.
Instrument of instructions were issued to the Governor -General and to the Governors by the British Government under Government of India Act 1935 but Directive Principles of State Policy are the instructions to the Legislature and the Executive.
3.
The Directive Principles of State Policy constitute a complete economic, social and political programme for a modern democratic state.
They aim at realising the high ideals of justice, liberty, equality and fraternity.
They represent the concept of a welfare state.
In brief, they seek to establish economic and social democracy in the country.
4.
The Directive Principles of State Policy is non-justiciable in nature.
It means they are not legally enforceable by the courts for their violation.
Therefore, the Central Government, State Governments and Local Governments cannot be compelled to implement them.
Nevertheless, Article 37 says it shall be the duty of the state to apply these principles in making laws.
CLASSIFICATION OF THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY: The constitution does not contain any classification of Directive Principles of State Policy.
However, on the basis of their content and direction they can be classified into following three categories: 1.
SOCIALISTIC PRINCIPLES: These principles reflect the ideology of socialism.
They lay down the framework of a democratic socialistic state, aim at providing social and economic justice.
They set the path towards welfare state and they direct the state: i) To promote the welfare of the people by securing a social order infused by social justice, economic justice and political justice and to minimize inequalities in income, status, facilities and opportunities (Article 38).
ii) To secure: a) The right to adequate means of livelihood to all citizens; b) The equitable distribution of material resources of the community for the common good; c) Prevention of concentration of wealth and means of production; d) Equal pay for equal work for men and women; e) Preservation of the health and strength of workers and children against forcible abuse; f) Opportunities for healthy development of children (Article39) iii) To promote equal justice and to provide free legal aid to the poor (Article 39-A) iv) To secure the right to work, to education and to public assistance in case of unemployment (Article 41) v) To make provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief (Article 42) vi) To secure a living wage, a decent standard of life and social and cultural opportunities for all workers.
(Article-43) vii) To take steps to secure the participation of workers in the management of industries (Article 43 A) viii) To raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living of people and to improve public health (Article 47) 2.
GANDHIAN PRINCIPLES: These principles are based on Gandhian ideology.
In order to fulfill the dreams of Gandhi, some of his ideas were included as Directive Principles of State Policy.
Gandhian Principles require the state: i) To organise village panchayats and provide them with necessary powers and authority to enable them to function as units of self-government.
(Article 40) ii) To promote cottage industries on an individual or cooperation basis in rural areas (Article 43) iii) To promote voluntary formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management of co-operative societies.
(Article 43 B) iv) To promote the educational and economic interests of SCs, STs and other weaker sections of the society and to protect them from social injustice and exploitation (Article 46) v) To prohibit the consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs which are injurious to health (Article 47) vi) To prohibit the slaughter of cows, calves and other milch and draught cattle and to improve their breeds (Article 48) --- 3.
LIBERAL-INTELLECTUAL PRINCIPLES: The principles included in this category represent the ideology of liberalism.
They direct the state: i) To secure for all citizens a uniform civil code throughout the country.
(Article 44) ii) To provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six years.
(Article 45) iii) To organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines.
(Article 48) iv) To protect and improve the environment and to safeguard forests and wild life.
(Article 48 A) v) To protect monuments, places and objects of artistic or historic interests which are declared to be of national importance (Article49) vi) To separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the state (Article 50) vii) To promote international peace and security and maintain just and honorable relation between nations; to promote respect for international law and treaty obligations, and to encourage settlement of international disputes by negotiation.
(Article 51) SANCTION BEHIND DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY: The Directive Principles of State Policy are non-justiciable in character.
But the constitution makes it clear that these principles are fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the state to apply these principles in making laws.
Thus, they impose a moral obligation on the state authorities for their application, but the force behind them is political opinion.
The framers of the constitution made the Directive Principles of State Policy non-justiciable and legally non-enforceable because: i) The country did not possess sufficient financial resources to implement them.
ii) The presence of vast diversity and backwardness in the country would stand in the way of their implementation.
iii) The newly born independent Indian state with its many pre-occupations might be crushed under the burden unless it was free to decide the order, the time, the place and the mode of fulfilling them.
CRITICISM OF THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY: The Directive Principles of State Policy has been criticised on the following grounds: i) NO LEGAL FORCE: The Directive Principles of State Policy has been criticised mainly because of their non-justiciable character.
ii) ILLOGICALLY ARRANGED: The Directive Principles of State Policy is neither properly classified nor logically arranged.
The declaration mixes up relatively unimportant issues with the most vital economic and social questions.
iii) CONSERVATIVE: The Directive Principles of States Policy is based on the political philosophy of the 19th century England.
Probably this is entirely outdated in 21st century India.
iv) CONSTITUTIONAL CONFLICT: The Directive Principles of State Policy may lead to a constitutional conflict (a) between the centre and the states, (b) between the President and the Prime Minister, and (c) between the Governor and the Chief Minister.
For example, the centre can give directions to the states with regard to the implementation of these principles, and in case of non-compliance, can dismiss the state government.
COMPARISON OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND DPSP: i) Fundamental Rights are negative as they prohibit the state from doing certain things but Directive Principles of State Policy is positive as it requires the state to do certain things.
ii) Fundamental Rights are justiciable, that is, they are legally enforceable by the courts in case of their violation but Directive Principles of State Policy is non-justiciable, that is, it is not legally enforceable by the courts for its violation.
iii) Fundamental Rights aim at establishing political democracy in the country but Directive Principles of State Policy aims at establishing social and economic democracy in the country.
iv) Fundamental Rights have legal sanctions but Directive Principles of State Policy has moral and political sanctions.
v) Fundamental Rights promote the welfare of the individual.
Hence, they are personal and individualistic but Directive Principles of State Policy promotes welfare of the society.
Hence, it is societarian and socialistic.
vi) Fundamental Rights do not require any legislation for their implementation.
They are automatically enforced but Directive Principles of State Policy requires legislation for its implementation.
It is not automatically enforced.
vii) The courts are bound to declare a law violative of any of the Fundamental Rights as unconstitutional and invalid but the courts can not declare a law violative of any of the Directive Principles of State Policy as unconstitutional and invalid.
: FEDERAL STRUCTURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF LEGISLATIVE AND FINANCIAL POWERS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES FEDERAL STRUCTURE: Government is classified as unitary and federal on the basis of relations between the national government and regional governments.
A unitary government is one in which all the powers are vested in the national government and the regional governments (if exists) derive their authority from the national government.
A federal government is one in which powers are divided between the national government and the regional governments and both operate in their respective jurisdictions independently.
In a federal structure, the national government is known as the Federal Government and the regional government is known as the State Government or Provincial Government.
Belgium, Britain, China, France, Italy, Japan, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and so on have the unitary structure of government while Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Russia, Switzerland, the U.S and so on have the federal structure of government.
The features of the federal and unitary structures are mentioned below in a comparative manner.
COMPARISON BETWEEN FEDERAL & UNITARY STRUCTURES: i) In Federal Structure, there is Dual government, that is, national government and state government but in Unitary Structure, there is Single government, that is, the national government which may create regional governments.
ii) In Federal Structure, there is written constitution but in Unitary Structure, the Constitution may be written like France or unwritten like Britain.
iii) In Federal Structure, there is division of powers between the national and state governments but in Unitary Structure, there is no division of powers.
All powers are vested in the national government.
iv) In Federal Structure, there is supremacy of the constitution governments but in Unitary Structure, the constitution may be supreme (Japan) or may not be supreme (Britain).
v) In Federal Structure, there is rigid constitution but in Unitary Structure, constitution may be rigid (France) or flexible (Britain).
vi) In Federal Structure, there is Independent judiciary but in Unitary Structure, judiciary may be independent or may not be independent vii) In Federal Structure, there is bicameral legislature but in Unitary Structure, legislature may be bicameral (Britain) or unicameral (China).
The term 'federation' is derived from a Latin word 'foedus' which means 'treaty' or 'agreement'.
Thus, a federation is a political system which is formed through a treaty or an agreement between the various units.
The units of a federation are known by various names like states (as in US) or cantons (as in Switzerland) or provinces (as in Canada) or republics (as in Russia).
The US is the first and the oldest federation in the world.
The constitution of India provides for a federal system of government in our country.
But the term 'federation' has nowhere been used in our constitution.
Article - 1 of the constitution describes India is a 'union of states'.
According to Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, the phrase 'union of states' has been preferred to 'Federation of states' to indicate two things.
i) The Indian federation is not the result of an agreement among the states like the American Federation; and ii) The states have no right to secede from the federation.
Our federation is a union because it is indestructible.
FEDERAL FEATURES OF OUR CONSTITUTION: The federal features of the constitution of India are: 1) DUAL POLITY: The constitution of India establishes a dual polity consisting the union at the centre and the states at the periphery.
Each is provided with sovereign powers to be exercised in the field assigned to them respectively by the constitution.
The union government deals with the matters of national importance like defence, foreign affairs, currency, communication and so on.
The state governments, on the other hand, look after the matters of regional and local importance like public order, agriculture, health, local government and so on.
2) WRITTEN CONSTITUTION: The constitution of India is not only a written document but also the lengthiest constitution of the world.
Originally, it contained a preamble, 395 Articles (divided into 22 parts) 8 schedules but at present (2o16), it consists of a preamble, 448 Articles (divided into 25 parts) and 12 schedules.
It specifies the structure, organisation, powers and function of both the central and state governments and prescribes the limits within which they must operate.
Thus, it avoids the misunderstandings and disagreements between the two.
3) DIVISION OF POWERS: The constitution of India divided the powers between the centre and the states in terms of the Union List, State List and Concurrent List in the 7th Schedule.
The Union List consists of 100 subjects, the State List 61 subjects and the Concurrent List 52 subjects.
Both the centre and the states can make laws on the subjects of the Concurrent List, but in case of conflict, the central law prevails.
The residuary subjects (i.e., which are not mentioned in any of the three lists) are given to the centre.
4) SUPREMACY OF THE CONSTITUTION: The constitution is the supreme law of the land.
The laws enacted by the centre and the states must conform to the provisions of the constitution of India.
Otherwise, they can be declared invalid by the Supreme Court or the High Courts through their power of Judicial Review.
Thus, the organs of the government (Legislative, Executive and Judicial) at both the levels must operate within the jurisdiction prescribed by the constitution.
5) RIGID CONSTITUTION: The division of powers established by the constitution as well as the supremacy of the constitution can be maintained only if the method of its amendment is rigid.
Hence, the constitution is rigid to the extent that those provisions which are concerned with the federal structure (i.e., centre-state relations and judicial organisation) can be amended only by the joint action of the central and state governments.
Such provisions can be amended by a special majority of the parliament and also an approval of half of the state legislatures.
6) INDEPENDENT JUDICIARY: The constitution of India establishes an independent judiciary headed by the Supreme Court for two purposes: one, to protect the supremacy of the constitution by exercising the power of judicial review; and two, to resolve the disputes between the centre and the states or between the states.
The constitution contains various measures like: security of tenure to judges, fixed service conditions and so on to make the judiciary independent of the government.
7) BICAMERALISM: The constitution provides for a bicameral legislature consisting of an Upper House (Rajya Sabha) and a Lower House (Lok Sabha).
The Rajya Sabha represents the states of Indian Federation, while the Lok Sabha represents the people of India as a whole.
The Rajya Sabha protects the interests of the states against the undue interference of the centre.
UNITARY FEATURES OF THE CONSTITUTION: Besides the federal features, Indian constitution also possesses the following unitary or non- federal features: 1) STRONG CENTRE: The division of powers is in favour of the centre and highly inequitable from the federal angle.
i.
The union list contains more subjects than the state list.
ii.
More important subjects have been included in the union list.
iii.
Centre has overriding authority over the concurrent list.
iv.
The residuary powers have also left with the centre; Thus, the constitution has made the centre very strong.
2) STATES NOT INDESTRUCTIBLE: The states in India have no right to territorial integrity.
The parliament can by unilateral action can change the area, boundaries or name of any state.
Moreover, it requires only a simple majority and not a special majority.
Hence, the Indian Federation is 'an indestructible union of destructible states.'
3) SINGLE CONSTITUTION: Usually, in a federation, the states have the right to frame their own constitutions but in India no such power is given to the states.
Both the centre and the states operate within a single constitution except Jammu and Kashmir.
4) FIEXIBILITY OF THE CONSTITUTION: Constitutional amendment is less rigid than that of other federation.
The bulk of the constitution can be amended by the unilateral action of the Parliament, either by simple majority or by special majority.
Further, the power to initiate an amendment to the constitution lies only with the centre.
5) EMERGENCY PROVISIONS: There are three types of emergencies: National, State and Financial.
During emergency, the central government becomes all powerful and the states will be in the total control of the centre.
It converts the federal structure into a unitary during emergency.
6) SINGLE CITIZENSHIP: In spite of a dual polity, the constitution of India adopted the system of single citizenship.
There is only Indian citizenship and no separate citizenship.
All citizens enjoy the same rights all over the country.
The other federal countries have dual citizenship, that is, national citizenship as well as state citizenship.
7) INTEGRATED JUDICIARY: The Indian constitution has established an integrated judicial system with the Supreme Court at the top and the state high courts below it.
This single system of courts enforces both the central laws as well as the state laws.
8) ALL INDIA SERVICES: In India, the centre and the states have their separate public services.
But, in addition, there are all India services (IAS, IPS and IFS) which are common to both the centre and the states.
The members of these services are recruited and trained by the centre which also possess ultimate control over them.
Thus, these services violate the principle of federalism.
9) INTEGRATED AUDIT MACHINERY: The Comptroller and Audition General of India audits the accounts of not only the central government but also those of the states.
But, his appointment and removal is done by the President without consulting the states.
Hence, this office restricts the financial autonomy of the states.
10) PARLIAMENT'S AUTHORITY OVER STATE LIST: The Parliament is empowered to legislate on any subject of the state list if Rajya Sabha passes a resolution in the national interest.
Especially, this can be done when there is no emergency.
11) APPOINTMENT OF GOVERNOR: The governor, who is the head of the state, is appointed by the President.
He holds the office during the pleasure of the President.
He also acts as an agent of the centre.
Through him, the centre exercises control over the states.
12) INTEGRATED ELECTION MACHINERY: The Election Commission conducts elections not only to the central legislature but also to the state legislatures.
But this body is constituted by the President and the states have no say in this matter.
The President can remove any member of the Election Commission.
13) VETO OVER STATE BILLS: The governor is empowered to reserve certain types of bills passed by the state legislature for the consideration of the President.
The President can withhold his assent to such bills not only in the first instance but also in the second instance.
Thus, the President enjoys absolute veto over state bills.
CRITICAL EVALUATION OF THE FEDERAL SYSTEM: It is clear that Indian constitution has incorporated a large number of unitary or non-federal features.
More power has been given to the centre for which the constitutional experts challenge the federal character of our constitution.
Though our constitution has created a strong central government, it has not made the state governments weak and has not reduced them to the level of administrative agencies for the execution of policies of the central government.
Indian federation is a new kind of federation to meet India's peculiar needs.
DISTRIBUTION OF POWERS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES: The constitution of India divides all Legislative, Executive and Financial powers between the centre and the states.
However, there is no division of judicial power as the constitution has established an integrated judicial system to enforce both the central laws as well as the state laws.
The centre-state relations can be studied under the following three heads: (A) LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS: Articles 245 to 255 of the constitution deal with the legislative relations between the centre and the states.
There are following four aspects in the centre- state legislative relations: 1) Territorial Extent of Central and State Legislation: The constitution defines the territorial limits of the legislative powers vested in the centre and the states as follows: i) The Parliament can make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India.
ii) A state legislature can make laws for the whole or any part of the state.
The laws made by a state legislature are not applicable outside the state.
iii) The laws of parliament are also applicable to the Indian citizens and their property in any part of the world.
However, there are restrictions on the territorial jurisdiction of the Parliament which means the laws of Parliament are not applicable in the following areas: i) The President can make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the four union territories- the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.
A regulation made by the President has the same force and effect as an act of Parliament.
The President may cancel or amend any act of Parliament in relation to these union territories.
ii) The governor may direct that an act of Parliament is not applicable to a scheduled area in the state or applicable with modifications.
iii) The governor of Assam may direct that an act of Parliament is not applicable to the autonomous tribal districts.
The President also enjoys the same power with respect to autonomous tribal districts of Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
2) Distribution of Legislative Subjects: The constitution provides Union List, State List and Concurrent List for the distribution of legislative subjects between the centre and the states.
i) The Parliament has exclusive powers to make laws with respect to any matters enumerated in the Union List.
At present this list has 100 subjects like defence, banking, foreign affairs, currency, atomic energy, insurance, communication, inter-state trade and commerce, census audit and so on.
ii) Normally, the state legislature has exclusive powers to make laws on 61 subjects enumerated in the State List like public order, police, public health and sanitation, agriculture, prisons, local government, fisheries, markets, theatres, gambling and so on.
iii) Both the Parliament and state legislature can make laws with respect to any matters enumerated in the Concurrent List.
At present, this list has 52 subjects like criminal law and procedure, civil procedure, marriage and divorce, population control and family planning, electricity, labour welfare, economic and social planning, drugs, newspapers, books and printing press and others.
It is clear that the matters of national importance and the matters which require uniformity of legislation nationwide are included in the Union List.
The matters of regional and local importance are in the State List.
The matters on which uniformity of legislation throughout the country is desirable but not essential are enumerated in the Concurrent List.
3) Parliamentary Legislation in the State Field: The above scheme of distribution of legislative powers between the centre and the states is to be maintained in normal times.
But in the following extra ordinary circumstances, the constitution empowers the Parliament to make laws on any matter enumerated in the state list.
i) When Rajya Sabha passes a Resolution ii) During a National Emergency iii) When states make a request iv) To implement international agreements v) During President's rule.
4) Centre's Control over State Legislation: Besides the parliament's power to legislate directly on the state subjects under the exceptional situations, the constitution empowers the centre to exercise control over the state legislative matters in the following ways: i) The governor can reserve certain types of bills passed by the state legislature for the consideration of the President.
The President enjoys absolute veto over them.
ii) Bills on certain matters enumerated in the State List can be introduced in the state legislature only with the previous sanction of the President (e.g., the bills imposing restrictions on the freedom of trade and commerce.
iii) The President can direct the states to reserve money bills and other financial bills passed by the state legislature for his consideration during Financial Emergency.
From the above, it is clear that the constitution has assigned a position of superiority to the centre in the legislative sphere.
(B) ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS: Articles 256 to 263 of the constitution deal with the administrative relations between the centre and the states.
1) Distribution of Executive Powers: The executive power has been divided between the centre and the states as follows: The executive power of the centre extends to the subjects enumerated in the Union List and the executive power of the states extends to the subjects enumerated in the State List.
The execution of the laws on the subjects enumerated in the Concurrent List is with the states except when the Parliament has directed otherwise.
The constitution restricts the executive power of the states to give sufficient scope to the centre for exercising its executive power in an unrestricted manner.
2) Centre's Directions to the states: The centre is also empowered to give directions to the states to exercise their executive power in the following matters: i) The construction and maintenance of means of communication, which are of national or military importance, by the state.
ii) The measures to be taken for the protection of the railways within the state.
iii) The provision of adequate facilities for instruction in the mother tongue at the primary stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minority groups in the state.
iv) The drawing up and execution of the specified schemes for the welfare of the scheduled tribes in the state.
3) Mutual Delegation of Function: The distribution of legislative powers between the centre and the states is rigid.
Consequently, the centre cannot delegate its legislative powers to the states and a single state cannot request the Parliament to make a law on a state subject.
The distribution of executive powers in general follows the distribution of legislative powers.
But, such a rigid division in the executive sphere may lead to occasional conflicts between the centre and the states.
Hence, the constitution provides for inter-government delegation of executive function in order to mitigate rigidity and avoid a situation of deadlock.
Accordingly, with the consent of the state government, the President entrusts any of the executive functions of the centre to that state government.
The state government can entrust any of its executive functions to the central government.
This mutual delegation of administrative functions may be conditional or unconditional.
4) All India Services: The centre and the states have their separate public services called as the central services and the state services respectively.
In addition, there are all India services: IAS, IPS and IFS.
The members of these services occupy top positions under both the centre and the states but they are recruited and trained by the centre.
These services are controlled jointly by the centre and the states but the ultimate control lies with the central government while the immediate control vests with the state government.
5) Public Service Commissions: In the field of public service commissions, the Centre- State relations are as follows: i) The chairman and members of a State Public Service Commission, though appointed by the governor of the state, can be removed only by the President.
ii) The Parliament can establish a Joint State Public Service Commission (JSPSC) for two or more states on the request of the state legislatures concerned.
The chairman and the members of the JSPSC are appointed by the President.
iii) The Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) can serve the needs of a state on the request of the state governor and with the approval of the President.
6) Integrated Judicial System: The constitution of India established an integrated judicial system with the Supreme Court at the top and the state high courts below it.
This single system of courts enforces both the central laws as well as the state laws.
This is done to eliminate diversities in the remedial process.
The judges of a state high court are appointed by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the Governor of the state.
They can also be transferred by the President.
The parliament can establish a common high court for two or more states, e. g., Maharashtra and Goa or Punjab and Haryana.
7) Relations during Emergencies: i) During the operation of a National Emergency the centre is entitled to give executive directions to the state governments which are under the complete control of the centre.
ii) When the President's rule is imposed in a state the President assumes all the functions of the state government and powers are vested in the Governor or any other Executive Authority in the state.
iii) During the operation of a Financial Emergency the centre can direct the states to observe canons of financial propriety and the President can give other necessary directions including the reduction of salaries of persons serving in the state and high court judges.
8) Other Provisions: The centre exercises following control over the state administration: i) It is the duty of the centre to protect every state against external aggression and internal disturbance.
The centre has to ensure that the state governments are carried on in accordance with the provisions of the constitution.
ii) The governor of a state is appointed by the President.
He holds office during the pleasure of the President and he is the constitutional head of the state.
He acts as an agent of the centre in the state and submits periodical reports to the centre about the administration of the state.
iii) The State Election Commissioner, though appointed by the Governor of the state, can be removed only by the President.
(c) FINANCIAL RELATIONS: The constitution deals with following centre-state financial relations: 1) Allocation of Taxing Powers: The constitution divides the taxing powers between the centre and the state as follows: i) The Parliament has the power to impose taxes on the subjects enumerated in the Union List (which are 15 in number).
ii) The state legislature has exclusive power to impose taxes on the subjects enumerated in the State List (which are 20 in number).
iii) Both the Parliament and the state legislature can impose taxes on subjects enumerated in the Concurrent List (which are 3 in number) iv) The residuary power of taxation is vested in Parliament.
Under this provision, the Parliament has imposed Gift Tax, Wealth Tax and Expenditure Tax.
The constitution provides power to impose and collect tax and the power to appropriate the proceeds of the tax.
For example, the income tax is imposed and collected by the centre but its proceeds are distributed between the centre and the states.
2) Distribution of Tax Revenues: The 10th Finance Commission recommended that out of the total income obtained from certain central taxes and duties, 29% should go to the states.
This is known as the 'Alternative Scheme of Devolution'.
3) Distribution of Non-tax Revenues: The major sources of non-tax revenues of the centre are Post and Telegraphs, Railways, Banking, Broadcasting, Coinage and Currency, Central Public Sector Enterprises, etc.
The major sources of non-tax revenues of the states are Irrigation, Forests, Fisheries, State Public Sector Enterprises, etc.
4) Grant-in-aid to the States: Besides sharing of taxes between the centre and the states, the constitution provides for grants-in-aid to the states from the central resources.
There are two types of grants-in-aid, viz, Statutory Grants and Discretionary Grants.
As per Statutory Grants, Parliament gives grants to the states which are in need of financial assistance and not to every state.
As per Discretionary Grants, both the centre and the states give any grants for any public purpose.
Under, this provision, the centre makes grants to the states.
5) Finance Commission: Article 280 provides for a Finance Commission which recommends following matters to the President: o The distribution of the proceeds of taxes to be shared between the centre and the states.
o The principles which should govern the grants-in-aid to the states by the centre out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
o The measures needed to increase the Consolidated Fund of a state to supplement the resources of the panchayats and the municipalities in the state on the basis of the recommendations made by the State Finance Commission.
o Any other matter referred to it by the president in the interests of sound finance.
TENSION AREAS IN CENTRE-STATE RELATIONS: The issues which created tensions and conflicts between the centre and the states are: 1) Mode of appointment and dismissal of Governor; 2) Discriminatory and partisan role of Governor; 3) Imposition of President's Rule for partisan interests; 4) Deployment of Central Forces in the states to maintain law and order; 5) Reservation of State Bills for the consideration of the President; 6) Discrimination of financial allocations to the states; 7) Role of Planning Commission (NITI Aayogo) in approving state projects; 8) Management of All-India services (IAS, IPS and IFS; 9) Use of electronic media for political purposes; 10) Appointment of enquiry commissions against the Chief Ministers; 11) Sharing of finances (between Centre and States); and 12) Encroachment by the Centre on the State List.
THE UNION LEGISLATURE: The union legislature is called Parliament which occupies the central position in our democratic political system.
Article 79 to 122 of the constitution deal with the organisation, composition, duration, officers, procedures, privileges, powers and so on of the Parliament (Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha).
ORGANISATION OF PARLIAMENT: Our Parliament consists of President, Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha.
The Rajya Sabha/ the Council of States/Second Chamber/Upper House/House of Elders represents the states and union territories of India and the Lok Sabha/ the House of the People/ First Chamber/ Lower House/ Popular House represents the people of India as a whole.
Though the President of India is not a member of either House of Parliament and does not sit in the Parliament to attend its meetings, he is an integral part of Parliament.
This is because a bill passed by both the houses of Parliament cannot become law without the consent of the President.
He also performs certain functions of the Parliament, e. g., he summons, pro-rogues both the Houses, dissolves the Lok Sabha, addresses both the Houses, issues ordinances when the Parliament is not in session and so on.
COMPOSITION OF THE PARLIAMENT: The composition of the Parliament has been discussed under the two following heads: COMPOSITION OF RAJYA SABHA: The maximum strength of the Rajya Sabha is fixed at 250 out of which, 238 are to be the representatives of the states and union territories (elected indirectly) and 12 are nominated by the President.
1) REPRESENTATION OF STATES: The representatives of state in Rajya Sabha are elected by the elected members of state legislative assemblies.
The election is held in accordance with the System of Proportional Representation by Means of Single Transferable Vote.
The seats are allotted to the states in the Rajya Sabha on the basis of population.
2) REPRESENTATION OF UNION TERRITORIES: The representatives of each union territory in the Rajya Sabha are indirectly elected by members of an electoral college specially constituted for the purpose.
This election is also held in accordance with the System of Proportional Representation by Means of Single Transferable Vote.
Out of the seven union territories, only Delhi and Puducherry have representation in the Rajya Sabha.
The populations of other five union territories are too small to have any representatives in the Rajya Sabha.
3) NOMINATED MEMBERS: The President nominates 12 members to the Rajya Sabha from people who have special knowledge or practical experience in art, literature, science and social service.
The justification behind this principle of nomination is to provide eminent persons a place in the Rajya Sabha without going through the process of election.
COMPOSITION OF LOK SABHA: The maximum strength of the Lok Sabha is fixed at 552.Out of this, 530 members are the representatives of the states, 20 members are the representatives of the union territories and 2 members are nominated by the President from the Anglo-Indian community.
At present, the Lok Sabha has 545 members.
Of these, 530 members represent the states, 13 members represent the union territories and 2 Anglo- Indian members are nominated by the President.
1) REPRESENTATION OF STATES: The representatives of states in the Lok Sabha are directly elected by the people from the constituencies in the states.
The election is based on the principle of Universal Adult Franchise.
Every Indian citizen who is 18 years of age or above and who is not disqualified under the provisions of the constitution or any law is eligible to vote at such election.
2) REPRESENTATION OF UNION TERRITORIES: The representatives of Union territories in the Lok Sabha are also directly elected by the people from the constituencies in the union territories.
3) NOMINATED MEMBERS: The President can nominate two members from the Anglo-Indian community if the community is not adequately represented in the Lok Sabha.
DURATION OF RAJYA SABHA: The Rajya Sabha first constituted in 1952.
It is a continuing chamber, that is, it is a permanent body and not subject to dissolution.
However, one third of its members retire every second year.
Their seats are filled up by fresh elections and presidential nominations at the beginning of every third year.
The retiring members are eligible for re-election and nomination any number of times.
The term of office of a member of the Rajya Sabha shall be six years.
In the first batch, the term of members was decided by lottery as to who should retire.
DURATION OF LOK SABHA: The normal term of Lok Sabha is five years from the date of its first meeting after the general elections, after which it dissolves automatically.
However, the President is authorized to dissolve the Lok Sabha at any time before the completion of five years and this cannot be challenged in a court of law.
Further, the term of Lok Sabha can be extended during the period of national emergency for any length of time.
However, this extension cannot continue beyond a period of six months after the emergency is ceased to operate.
QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT: 1) He must be a citizen of India.
2) He must be not less than 30 years of age in the case of Rajya Sabha and not less than 25 years of age in the case of Lok Sabha.
3) He must make an oath before the person authorized by the Election Commission to bear true faith on the constitution of India and to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.
4) He must possess other qualifications prescribed by the Parliament.
DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT: A person shall be disqualified for being elected as a member of Parliament: 1) If he holds any office of profit under the government (except that of a minister or any other office exempted by Parliament) 2) If he is of unsound mind which declared by a court.
3) If he is a bankrupt.
4) If he is not a citizen of India or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign state.
5) If he is disqualified under any law made by Parliament.
SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MP: Members of either House of Parliament are entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may be determined by the Parliament.
There is no provision of pension for MP in the constitution but Parliament has provided pension to the members.
PRESIDING OFFICERS OF PARLIAMENT: Each house of Parliament has its own presiding officer.
There is a Speaker and a Deputy speaker for the Lok Sabha.
There is a Chairman and a Deputy Chairman for the Rajya Sabha.
A panel of Chairpersons for the Lok Sabha and a panel of Vice-Chairpersons for the Rajya Sabha are also appointed.
SECRETARIAT OF PARLIAMENT: Each house of Parliament has separate secretarial staff of its own, though there can be some posts common to both the house.
Their recruitment and service conditions are regulated by Parliament.
The secretariat of each house is headed by a Secretary-General.
He is a permanent officer and is appointed by the Presiding Officer of the house.
LEADER OF THE HOUSE: In Lok Sabha, the 'Leader of the House' means the Prime Minister or a member of the Lok Sabha may be nominated by the Prime Minister to function as the Leader of the House.
There is also a 'Leader of the House' in the Rajya Sabha.
He is a minister and a member of the Rajya Sabha and is nominated by the Prime Minister to function as such.
He can also nominate a Deputy Leader of the House.
The leader of the house in either house exercises direct influence on the conduct of business.
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: In each House of Parliament, there is the Leader of the Opposition.
The leader of the largest opposition party having not less than one-tenth seats of the total strength of the House is recognized as the Leader of the Opposition in that House.
In a parliamentary system of government, the leader of the opposition has a significant role to play.
His main functions are to provide a constructive criticism of the policies of the government and to provide an alternative government.
The leader of the opposition in the Lok Sabha and the leader of the opposition in the Rajya Sabha are entitled to the salary, allowances and other facilities equivalent to that of a cabinet minister.
WHIP: Every political party, whether ruling or opposition has its own Whip in the Parliament.
He is appointed by the political party to serve as an Assistant Floor Leader.
His responsibility is to ensure the attendance of his party members in large numbers and secure their support in favour of or against a particular issue.
He regulates and monitors their behaviour in the Parliament.
The members are supposed to follow the directives given by the whip otherwise disciplinary action can be taken.
SESSIONS OF PARLIAMENT: SUMMONING: The President from time to time summons each House of Parliament to meet.
But the maximum gap between two sessions of Parliament cannot be more than six months.
In other words, the Parliament should meet at least twice a year.
There are usually three sessions in a year, viz, i) The Budget Session (February to May); ii) The Monsoon Session (July to September); and iii) The Winter Session (November to December).
During a session, the House meets every day to transact business.
ADJOURNMENT: A session of Parliament consists of many meetings.
Each meeting of a day consists of two sittings, that is, a Morning Sitting from 11 A.M to 1 P.M and Post Lunch Sitting from 2 P.M to 6 P.M. A sitting of Parliament can be terminated by adjournment or adjournment sine die or prorogation or dissolution (in case of Lok Sabha).
An adjournment suspends the work in a sitting for a specified time, which may be hours, days or weeks.
DISSOLUTION: Rajya Sabha, being a permanent House, is not subject to dissolution.
Only, the Lok Sabha is subject to dissolution.
A dissolution ends the very life of the existing House and a new house is constituted after general elections are held.
The dissolution of the Lok Sabha may take place in either of two ways: i) Automatic dissolution, that is, on the expiry of its tenure of five years or the terms as extended during a National Emergency; or ii) When the President decides to dissolve the house, which he is authorised to do so.
QUORUM IN PARLIAMENT: Quorum is the minimum number of members required to be present in the house before it can transact any business.
It is one-tenth of the total number of members in each house including the Presiding Officer.
It means that there must be at least 55 members present in the Lok Sabha and 25 members present in the Rajya Sabha, if any business is to be conducted.
If there is no quorum during a meeting of the house, it is the duty of the Presiding Officer either to adjourn the house or to suspend the meeting until there is quorum.
VOTING IN PARLIAMENT: All matters of either house or joint sitting of both the houses are decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, excluding the Presiding Officer.
Only a few matters which are specially mentioned in the constitution like Impeachment of the President, Amendment of the Constitution, Removal of the Presiding Officers of the Parliament and so on, require Special Majority, not Ordinary Majority.
The Presiding Officer of a house does not vote in the first instance, but exercises a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
LANGUAGE IN PARLIAMENT: The constitution has declared Hindi and English to be the languages for transacting business in the Parliament.
However, the Presiding Officer can permit a member to address the House in his mother tongue.
In both Houses, arrangements are made for simultaneous translation.
LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE IN PARLIAMENT: The legislative procedure is identical in both the Houses of Parliament.
Every bill has to pass through the same stages in each House.
A bill is a proposal for legislation and it becomes an act or law when duly passed.
Bills introduced in Parliament are Public Bills/ Government Bills and Private Bills/Private Members Bills.
Both are governed by the same procedure and pass through the same stages in the house.
The following bills can be introduced in the Parliament: i) Ordinary Bills, which are concerned with any matter other than financial subjects.
ii) Money Bills, which are concerned with the financial matters like taxation, public expenditure, etc.
iii) Financial Bills, which are also concerned with financial matters (but are different from money bills).
iv) Constitution Amendment Bills, which are concerned with the amendment of the provisions of the constitution.
There are separate procedures for the enactment these bills.
JOINT SITTING OF TWO HOUSES: Joint sitting resolves a dead lock between the two houses over the passage of a bill.
A deadlock may take place under any one of the following three situations after a bill has been passed by one house and transmitted to the other house: i) If the bill is rejected by the other house; ii) If the houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be made in the bill; or iii) If more than six months have elapsed from the date of the receipt of the bill by the other house without the bill being passed by it.
In these three situations, the President can summon both the houses to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose of deliberating and voting on the bill.
The provision of joint sitting is applicable to Ordinary Bills or Financial Bills only and not to Money Bills or Constitutional Amendment Bills.
In case of a Money Bill, the Lok Sabha has overriding powers, while a Constitutional Amendment Bill must be passed by each house separately.
BUDGET IN PARLIAMENT: Article 112 of the constitution deals with budget.
Budget is a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India in a financial year.
The budget contains i) Estimates of revenue and capital receipts, ii) Ways and means to raise the revenue, iii) Estimates of expenditure, and iv) Details of the actual receipts and expenditures of the closing financial year and the reasons for any deficit or surplus in that year.
v) Economic and financial policy of the coming year, i.e., taxation proposals, prospects of revenue, spending programme and introduction of new schemes/projects.
The government of India has two budgets, namely, the Railway Budget and the General Budget.
Railway Budget consists of estimates of receipts and expenditures of railway ministry and the General Budget consists of the estimates of receipts and expenditure of all the ministries of Government of India except the Railway Ministry.
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF PARLIAMENT/ ROLE OF PARLIAMENT: Parliament has a multifunctional role which are discussed under the following heads.
1) LEGISLATIVE POWERS AND FUNCTIONS: The primary function of Parliament is to make laws for the governance of the country.
It has power to make laws on the 100 subjects enumerated in the Union List and on the Residuary Subjects.
With regard to Concurrent List (which has 52 subjects), the Parliament has overriding powers, that is, the law of Parliament prevails over the law of the state legislature in case of a conflict between the two.
Parliament can also make laws on the 61 subjects enumerated in the State List under certain abnormal circumstances.
The Parliament makes laws in a skeleton form and authorises the Executive to make detailed rules and regulations.
This is known as Delegated Legislation/ Executive Legislation/Subordinate Legislation.
Such rules and regulations are placed before the Parliament for its examination.
2) EXECUTIVE POWERS AND FUNCTIONS: Executive is responsible to the Parliament for its policies and acts.
Hence, the Parliament exercises control over the Executive.
The ministers are collectively responsible to the Parliament in general and to the Lok Sabha in particular.
Each minister is individually responsible for the efficient administration of his ministry.
This means that they continue in office so long as they enjoy the confidence of the majority members in the Lok Sabha.
In other words, the Council of Ministers can be removed from office by the Lok Sabha by passing a no-confidence motion.
3) FINANCIAL POWERS AND FUNCTIONS: No tax can be levied or collected and no expenditure can be incurred by the Executive without the approval of Parliament.
Hence, the budget is placed before the Parliament for its approval.
The Parliament also scrutinises government spending and financial performance with the help of its financial committees (Public Accounts Committee, Estimates Committee and Committee on Public Undertakings).
They bring out the cases of illegal, irregular, unauthorised, improper usage and wastage and extravagance in public expenditure.
The budget is based on the Principle of Annuality, i.e., the Parliament grants money to the government for one financial year.
If the granted money is not spent by the end of the financial year, then the balance expires and returns to the Consolidated Fund of India.
This practice is known as the 'Rule of Lapse'.
It facilitates effective financial control by the Parliament.
4) CONSTITUENT POWERS AND FUNCTIONS: The Parliament can amend the constitution in three ways: i) By Simple Majority; ii) by Special Majority; and iii) by Special Majority but with the consent of half of the state legislatures by Simple Majority).
Simple Majority means a majority of the members present and voting in each house of Parliament.
Special Majority means a majority is more than 50 percent of the total membership of each house and a majority of not less than two thirds of the members present and voting in each house.
The power to initiate the process of the Amendment of the Constitution lies exclusively in the hands of Parliament and not the state legislature.
There is only one exception, that is, the state legislature can pass a resolution requesting the Parliament for the creation or abolition of the Legislative Council in the state.
The Parliament can amend any provision of the constitution except the 'basic features' of the constitution.
5) JUDICIAL POWERS AND FUNCTIONS: The judicial powers and functions of the Parliament include the following: i) It can impeach the President for the violation of the constitution.
ii) It can remove the Vice-President from his office.
iii) It can recommend the removal of judges (including Chief Justice) of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, Chief Election Commissioner, Comptroller and Auditor General to the President.
iv) It can punish its members or outsiders for the violation of its freedom or its disrespect.
6) ELECTORAL POWERS AND FUNCTIONS: The Parliament participates in the election of the President (along with the state legislative assemblies) and elects the Vice-President.
The Lok Sabha elects its Speaker and Deputy Speaker, while the Rajya Sabha elects its Deputy Chairman.
The Parliament is also authorised to make laws to regulate the elections to the offices of President and Vice-President, to both the Houses of Parliament and to both the Houses of State Legislature.
7) OTHER POWERS AND FUNCTIONS: i) Parliament serves as the highest deliberative body in the country.
It discusses various issues of national and international importance.
ii) It approves National, State and Financial Emergencies declared by the President.
iii) It can create or abolish the State Legislative Council on the recommendation of the concerned State Legislative Assembly.
iv) It can increase or decrease the area, alter the boundaries and change the names of states of the Indian Union.
v) It can regulate the organisation and jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and High Courts and can establish a common High Court for two or more states.
UNION EXECUTIVE: The organ of the government which implements and administers policy, rules and regulations made by the Legislature is called the Executive.
Articles 52 to 78 in Part-V of the constitution deal with the Union Executive.
The Union Executive consists of the President, the Vice- President, the Prime Minister, the Council of Ministers and the Attorney General of India.
PRESIDENT OF INDIA: The President is the head of the Indian state.
He is the first citizen of India and acts as the symbol of unity, integrity and solidarity of the nation.
ELIGIBILITY FOR ELECTION AS PRESIDENT: To be eligible for election as President one should fulfill the following qualifications: i) He should be a citizen of India.
ii) He should have completed 35 years of age.
iii) He should be qualified for election as a member of the Lok Sabha.
iv) He should not hold any office of profit under the union government or any state government or any local authority or any other public authority.
A sitting President or Vice- President of the union, the Governor of any state and a Minister of the union or any state is not deemed to hold any office of profit and hence qualified as a presidential candidate.
Further, the nomination of a candidate for election to the office of President must be subscribed by at least 50 electors as proposers and 50 electors as seconders.
Every candidate has to make a security deposit of Rs.
15000/- in the Reserve Bank of India.
The security deposit is liable to be forfeited in case the candidate fails to secure one- sixth of the votes polled.
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT: The President is elected not directly by the people but by the members of electoral college consisting of: i) The elected members of both the houses of Parliament.
ii) The elected members of the legislative assemblies of the states and iii) The elected members of the legislative assemblies of the union territories of Delhi and Puducherry.
The value of the vote of an MLA participated in the Presidential Election is determined as follows: Value of the vote of an MLA = [Total population of the state/Total number of elected members in the State Legislative Assembly] x (1/1000).
The value of the vote of an MP participated in the presidential election is determined as follows: Value of the vote of an MP = (Total value of votes of all MLAs of all states/Total number of elected members of Parliament.
The President's election is held in accordance with the System of Proportional Representation by Means of Single Transferable Vote and the voting is by secret ballot.
This system ensures that successful candidate is retained by the absolute majority of votes.
A candidate, in order to be declared elected to the office of President, must secure a fixed quota of votes.
The quota of votes is determined by dividing the total number of valid votes polled by dividing the number of candidates to be elected (here only one candidate is to be elected as the President) plus one and adding one to the quotient.
The formula can be expressed as: Electoral quota = [Total number of valid votes polled/1+1 = (2)] +1 Each member of the electoral college is given only one ballot paper.
The voter, while casting his vote, is required to indicate his preferences by making 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
against the names of candidates.
This means that the voter can indicate as many preferences as there are candidates in the fray.
In the first phase, the first preference votes are counted.
In case a candidate secures the required quota in this phase, he is declared elected.
Otherwise, the process of transfer of votes is set in motion.
The ballots of the candidate securing the least number of first preference votes are cancelled and his second preference votes are transferred in the first preference votes of other candidates.
This process continues till a candidate secures the required quota.
All doubts and disputes in connection with election of the President are inquired into and decided by the Supreme Count whose decision is final.
OATH 'OR' AFFIRMATION BY THE PRESIDENT: Before entering upon his office, the President has to make and subscribe to an oath.
In his oath, the President swears: i) To faithfully execute the office; ii) To preserve, protect and defend the constitution and the law; and iii) To devote himself to the service and well-being of the people of India.
The oath of office to the President is administered by the Chief Justice of India and in his absence, the senior most judge of the Supreme Court available.
Any other person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President also undertakes the similar oath.
TERM OF PRESIDENT'S OFFICE: The President holds office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
However, he can resign from his office at any time by addressing the resignation letter to the Vice-President.
Further, he can also be removed from the office before completion of his term by the process of impeachment.
The President can hold office beyond his term of five years until his successor assumes charges.
He may be elected for any number of times.
IMPEACHMENT OF PRESIDENT: The President can be removed from office by a process of impeachment for 'violation of the constitution'.
The impeachment charges can be initiated by either house of the Parliament.
These charges should be signed by one-fourth members of the house (that framed the charges), and a 14 days' notice should be given to the President.
After the impeachment resolution is passed by a majority of two-thirds of the total membership of that house, it is sent to other house, which should investigate the charges.
The President has the right to appear and to be represented at such investigation.
If the other house also sustains the charges and passes the impeachment resolution by a majority of two- thirds of the total membership, then the President stands removed from his office from the date on which the resolution is so passed.
No President has so far been impeached.
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PRESIDENT: The powers and the functions of the President are: 1) EXECUTIVE POWERS: The executive powers and functions of the President are: i) All executive actions of the Government of India are formally taken in his name.
ii) He can make rules for more convenient transaction of business of the Union government, and for allocation of the said business among the ministers.
iii) He appoints the Prime Minister and other ministers.
They hold office during his pleasure.
iv) He appoints Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, the Chairman of Union Public Service Commission, the Auditor General of India, the Attorney General of India, the Governors of states, the Chairman and members of Finance Commission, and so on.
v) He can seek any information relating to the administration of affairs of the union, and proposals for legislation from the Prime Minister.
vi) He can appoint a commission to investigate into the conditions of SCs, STs and other backward classes.
vii) He can appoint an inter-state council to promote centre-state and inter-state cooperation.
viii) He directly administers the union territories through administrators appointed by him.
ix) He can declare any area as scheduled area and has powers with respect to the administration of scheduled areas and tribal areas.
2) LEGISLATIVE POWERS: The President is an integral part of the Parliament and enjoys the following legislative powers: i) He can summon or prorogue the Parliament and dissolve Lok Sabha.
He can also summon a joint sitting of both the houses of Parliament, which is presided over by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
ii) He can address the Parliament at the commencement of the first session after each general election and the first session of each year.
iii) He can appoint any member of the Lok Sabha to preside over its proceedings when the offices of both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker fall vacant.
Similarly, he can also appoint any member of the Rajya Sabha to preside over its proceedings when the offices of both the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman fall vacant.
iv) He nominates 12 members to the Rajya Sabha from amongst persons having special knowledge or practical experience in literature, science, art and social service.
v) He can nominate two members to the Lok Sabha from the Anglo-Indian community.
vi) He decides on questions as to disqualifications of members of the Parliament, in consultation with the Election Commission.
vii) His prior permission is needed to introduce certain types of bills in the Parliament, e.g., a bill involving expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, or a bill for the alteration of boundaries of states or creation of a new state.
viii) When a bill is sent to the President after it has been passed by the Parliament, he can: a) Give assent to the bill, or b) Refuse to give his assent to the bill, or c) Return the bill (if it is not a money bill) for consideration of the Parliament.
However, if the bill is passed again by the Parliament, with or without amendments, the President has to give his assent to the bill.
ix) He can promulgate ordinance when the Parliament is not in session.
These ordinances must be approved by the Parliament within six weeks from its reassembly.
He can also withdraw an ordinance at any time.
x) He places the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General, Union Public Service Commission, Finance Commission, and others, before the Parliament.
xi) He can make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of certain union territories.
3) FINANCIAL POWERS: The financial powers and functions of the President are: i) Money bills can be introduced in the Parliament only with his prior recommendation.
ii) He causes to be laid before the Parliament the Union Budget iii) No demand for a grant can be made except on his recommendation.
iv) He can make advances out of the Contingency Fund of India to meet any unforeseen expenditure.
v) He constitutes a Finance Commission after every five years to recommend the distribution of revenues between the centre and states.
4) JUDICIAL POWERS: The judicial powers and functions of the President are: i) He appoints the Chief Justice and the judges of Supreme Court and High courts.
ii) He can seek advice from the Supreme Court on any question of law or fact.
However, the advice tendered by the Supreme Court is not binding on the President.
iii) He can grant pardon, release, relief and reduction of punishment, or suspend, stop or substitute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence.
5) DIPLOMATIC POWERS: The international treaties and agreements are negotiated and concluded on behalf of the President.
However, they are subject to the approval of the Parliament.
He represents India in international forums and affairs and sends and receives diplomats like ambassadors, high commissioners, and so on.
6) MILITARY POWERS: He is the Supreme Commander of the defence forces of India.
In that capacity, he appoints the Chiefs of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force.
He can declare war or conclude peace, subject to the approval of the Parliament.
7) EMERGENCY POWERS: In addition to the normal powers mentioned above, the constitution grants extraordinary powers on the President to deal with the following three types of emergencies: i) National Emergency (Article 352); ii) President's Rule (Article 356 & 365); iii) Financial Emergency (Article 360) VICE-PRESIDENT The Vice-President occupies the second highest office in the country.
He is accorded a rank next to the President.
This office is modelled on the lines of the American Vice-President.
QUALIFICATIONS: To be eligible for election as Vice-President, a person should fulfill the following qualifications: i) He should be a citizen of India.
ii) He should have completed 35 years of age.
iii) He should be qualified for election as a member of the Rajya Sabha.
iv) He should not hold any office of profit under the union government or any state government or any local authority or any other public authority.
But a sitting President or Vice-President of the union, the governor of any state and minister for the union or any state is not deemed to hold any office of profit and hence qualified for being a candidate for Vice-President.
Further, the nomination of a candidate for election to the office of Vice-President must be subscribed by at least 20 electors as proposers and 20 electors as seconders.
Every candidate has to make a security deposit of Rs.
15,000 in the Reserve Bank of India.
ELECTION: The Vice-President is elected by the method of indirect election.
He is elected by the members of an Electoral College consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament.
This electoral college is different from the electoral college for the election of the President in the following two respects: i) It consists of both elected and nominated members of the Parliament (in the case of President, only elected members).
ii) It does not include the members of the state legislative assemblies (in the case of President, the elected members of the state legislative assemblies are included).
The Vice-President's election, like that of the President's election, is held in accordance with the System of Proportional Representation by means of Single Transferable Vote and voting is by Secret Ballot.
All doubts and disputes in connection with election of the Vice-President are inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision is final.
OATH 'or' AFFIRMATION: Before entering upon his office, the Vice-President has to make and subscribe to an oath.
In his oath, the Vice-President swears: i) To bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution of India and ii) To faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
The oath of office to the Vice-President is administered by the President or some person appointed by him.
TERM OF OFFICE: The Vice-President holds office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
However, he can resign from his office at any time by addressing the resignation letters to the President.
He can also be removed from the office before completion of his term.
He can be removed by a resolution of the Rajya Sabha passed by a special majority and agreed to by the Lok Sabha.
But, no such resolution can be moved unless at least 14 days' advance notice has been given.
The Vice-President can hold office beyond his term of five years until his successor assumes charge.
He is also eligible for re-election to that office.
He may be elected for any number of terms.
VACANCY IN OFFICE: A vacancy in the Vice-President's office can occur in any of the following ways: i) On the expiry of his tenure of five years ii) By his resignation iii) On his removal iv) By his death v) Otherwise, for example, when he becomes disqualified to hold office or when his election is declared invalid.
When the vacancy is due to the end of the term of the sitting Vice-President, election to fill the vacancy must be held before the end of the term.
If the office falls vacant by resignation, removal, death or otherwise, then election to fill the vacancy should be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy.
The newly-elected Vice-President remains in office for a full term of five years from the date he assumes charge of his office.
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS: The functions of Vice-President are two-folds: 1) He acts as the ex-officio Chairman of Rajya Sabha.
In this capacity, his powers and functions are similar to those of the Speaker of Lok Sabha.
In this respect, he is similar to the American Vice-President who also acts as the Chairman of the Senate-the Upper House of the American Legislature.
2) He acts as President when a vacancy occurs in the office of the President due to his resignation, removal, death or otherwise.
He can act as President only for a maximum period of six months within which a new President has to be elected.
Further, when the sitting President is unable to discharge his functions due to absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President discharges his functions which until the President resumes his office.
While acting as President or discharging the functions of President, the Vice-President does not perform the duties of the office of the Chairman of Rajya Sabha.
During this period, those duties are performed by the Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha.
EMOLUMENTS: The constitution has not fixed any emoluments for the Vice-President in that capacity.
He draws his regular salary in his capacity as the ex-officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.
The Parliament has increased the salary of the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and fixed it Rs.
3.5 lakhs per month.
In addition, he is entitled to daily allowance, free furnished residence, medical, travel and other facilities.
During any period when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges the functions of the President, he is not entitled to the salary or allowance payable to Chairman of Rajya Sabha, but the salary and allowances of the President.
PRIME MINISTER In our parliamentary system of government, the President is the nominal executive authority (dejure executive) and Prime Minister is the real executive authority (de facto executive).
APPOINTMENT OF THE PRIME MINISTER: Article 75 says that Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President.
The President has to appoint the leader of the majority party in the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minister.
But when no party has a clear majority in the Lok Sabha, then the President may exercise his personal discretion in the selection and appointment of the Prime Minister.
In such a situation, the President usually appoints the leader of the largest party or coalition in the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minister and asks him to seek a vote of confidence in the House within a month.
There is also one more situation when the President may have to exercise his individual judgement in the selection and appointment of the Prime Minister, that is, when the Prime Minister in office dies suddenly and there is no obvious successor.
However, if, on the death of the Prime Minister, the ruling party elects a new leader, the President has no choice but to appoint him as Prime Minister.
A person who is not a member of either House of Parliament can be appointed as Prime Minister for six months, within which, he should become a member of either House of Parliament; otherwise, he ceases to be the Prime Minister.
OATH: Before the Prime Minister enters upon his office, the President administers to him the oaths of office and secrecy.
In his oath, the Prime Minister swears: i) To bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India.
ii) To uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.
iii) To faithfully and carefully discharge the duties of his office.
iv)To do right in accordance with the constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill will.
In his oath of secrecy, the Prime Minister swears that he will not disclose any matter which is known to him as a union Minister.
TERM OF THE PRIME MINISTER: The term of the Prime Minister is not fixed and he holds office during the pleasure of the President.
However, this does not mean that the President can dismiss the Prime Minister at any time.
So long as the Prime Minister enjoys the majority support in the Lok Sabha, he cannot be dismissed by the President.
However, if he loses the confidence of the Lok Sabha, he must resign or the President can dismiss him.
SALARY AND ALLOWANCES OF THE PRIME MINISTER: The salary and allowances of the Prime Minister are determined by the Parliament from time to time.
He gets the salary and allowances which are payable to a member of Parliament.
Additionally, he gets a sumptuary allowance, free accommodation, travelling allowance, medical facilities etc.
POWER AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PRIME MINISTER: The powers and functions of Prime Minister can be studied under the following heads: 1) IN RELATION TO THE COUNCIL OF MINISTER: The Prime Minister enjoys the following powers as head of the Union Council of Ministers: i) He recommends persons who can be appointed as ministers by the President.
ii) He allocates and reshuffles various portfolios among the ministers.
iii) He can ask a minister to resign or advise the President to dismiss him in case of difference of opinion.
iv) He presides over the meeting of Council of Ministers and influences its decisions.
v) He guides, directs, controls, and coordinates the activities of all the ministers.
vi) He can bring about the collapse of the Council of Ministers by resigning from office.
The resignation or death of the Prime Minister automatically dissolves the Council of Ministers but the resignation or death of any other minister merely creates a vacancy which the Prime Minister may or may not like to fill.
2) IN RELATION TO THE PRESIDENT: i) The Prime Minister is the principal channel of communication between the President and the Council of Ministers.
It is the duty of the Prime Minister to communicate all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation to the President.
ii) He advises the President with regard to the appointment of important officials like Attorney General of India, Comptroller and Auditor General of India, Chairman and members of the Union Public Service Commission, Election Commissioners, Chairman and members of the Finance Commission and so on.
3) IN RELATION TO PARLIAMENT: As the leader of the Lok Sabha (Lower House) the Prime Minister enjoys the following powers: i) He advises the President with regard to summoning and proroguing of the sessions of the Parliament.
ii) He can recommend dissolution of the Lok Sabha to the President at any time.
iii) He announces government policies on the floor of the House.
4) OTHER POWERS & FUNCTIONS: i) The Prime Minister is the Chairman of the Planning Commission (now NITI Aayog), National Development Council, National Integration Council, Inter State Council and National Water Resources Council.
ii) He plays a significant role in shaping the foreign policy of the country.
iii) He is the chief spokesman of the Union Government.
iv) He is the crisis manager-in-chief at the political level during emergencies v) He is leader of the party in power.
vi) As a leader of the nation, he meets various sections of people in different states and receives memoranda from them regarding their problems.
Thus, the Prime Minister plays a very significant role in the political and administrative system of our country.
UNION COUNCIL OF MINISTERS: The Union Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister is the real executive authority in our politico-administrative system.
Article 74 deals with the status of Council of Ministers while Article 75 deals with the appointment, tenure, responsibility, qualification, oath and salaries and allowances of the ministers.
NATURE OF ADVICE BY MINISTERS: The Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister aid and advise the President in the exercise of his functions.
Further, the advice tendered by ministers to the President cannot be enquired by any court.
This implies the intimate and the confidential relationship between the President and the ministers.
Even after the dissolution of the Lok Sabha, the Council of Ministers does not cease to hold office.
The President cannot exercise the executive power without the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers.
APPOINTMENT OF MINISTERS: The Prime Minister is appointed by the President, while the other ministers are appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
This means that the President can appoint only those persons as ministers who are recommended by the Prime Minister.
Usually, the members of Parliament, either Lok Sabha or Rajya Sabha, are appointed as ministers.
A person who is not a member of either House of Parliament can also be appointed as a minister but within six months, he must become a member (either by election or nomination) of either House of Parliament, otherwise, he ceases to be a minister.
A minister who is a member of one house of Parliament has the right to speak and to take part in the proceedings of the other House also, but he can vote only in House of which he is a member.
OATH OF COUNCIL OF MINISTERS: Before a minister enters upon his office, the President administers to him the oaths of office and secrecy.
In his oath, the minister swears that he will not disclose any matter that is known to him as a union minister.
SALARY OF MINISTERS: The salaries and allowances of ministers are determined by the Parliament from time to time.
A minister gets the salary and allowances which are payable to a Member of Parliament.
Additionally, he gets a sumptuary allowance, free accommodation, travelling allowance and medical facilities.
RESPONSIBILITY OF COUNCIL OF MINISTERS: i) COLLECTIVE RESPONSIBILITY: The principle of collective responsibility also means that the Cabinet decisions bind all Cabinet Ministers (and other ministers) even if they differed in the Cabinet meeting.
It is the duty of every minister to stand by Cabinet decisions and support them both within and outside the Parliament.
If any minister disagrees with a Cabinet decision he has to resign.
Several ministers have resigned in the past due to their differences with the Cabinet.
ii) INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY: Individual responsibility of the ministers means that the ministers hold office during the pleasure of the President, which means that the President can remove a minister even at a time when the Council of Ministers enjoys the confidence of the Lok Sabha.
However, the President removes a minister only on the advice of the Prime Minister.
In case of a difference of opinion or dissatisfaction with the performance of minister, the Prime Minister can ask him to resign or advise the President to dismiss him.
COMPOSITION OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS: The Council of Ministers consists of three categories of ministers, namely, Cabinet Ministers, Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers.
The difference between them lies in their respective ranks, emoluments, and political importance.
The Prime Minister is at the top of all these ministers.
He is the supreme governing authority of the country.
The cabinet ministers head the important ministries like home, defence, finance, external affairs and so forth.
They are members of the cabinet, attend its meeting and play an important role in deciding policies.
The Ministers of States can either be given independent charge of ministries/departments or can be attached to Cabinet Ministers.
In case of attachment to the Cabinet Ministers they work under the supervision and guidance of the Cabinet Ministers.
In case of independent charge, they perform the same functions and exercise the same powers in relation to their ministries as Cabinet Ministers do.
However, they are not members of the Cabinet and do not attend the Cabinet meeting unless specially invited.
Next in rank are the Deputy Ministers.
They are not given independent charge of ministries.
They are attached to the Cabinet Ministers or Ministers of State and assist them in their administrative, political and parliamentary duties.
They are not members of the Cabinet and do not attend Cabinet meetings.
DISTINCTION BETWEEN COUNCIL OF MINISTERS AND CABINET: COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 1) Council of Ministers is a wider body consisting of 60 to 70 ministers but Cabinet is a smaller body consisting of 15 to 20 ministers.
2) Council of Ministers includes cabinet ministers, ministers of state and deputy ministers but Cabinet includes the cabinet ministers only.
Thus, it is a part of the council of ministers.
3) Council of Ministers does not meet, as a body, to transact government business.
It has no collective functions but Cabinet meets, as a body, frequently and usually once in a week to deliberate and take decisions regarding the transaction of government business.
Thus, it has collective functions.
4) Council of Ministers is vested with all powers, but in theory but Cabinet exercises, in practice, the powers of Council of Ministers.
5) The functions of Council of Ministers are determined by the Cabinet but the Cabinet directs the Council of Ministers by taking policy decisions which are binding on all ministers.
6) Council of Ministers implements the decisions taken by the Cabinet but the Cabinet supervises the implementation of its decisions by the Council of Ministers.
ROLE OF UNION CABINET: i) It is the highest decision-making authority in our politico-administrative system.
ii) It is the chief policy formulating body of the Central Government.
iii) It is the supreme executive authority of the Central Government.
iv) It is the chief coordinator of central administration.
v) It is an advisory body to the President and its advice is binding on him.
vi) It is the Chief Crisis Manager and thus deals with all emergency situations.
vii) It deals with all major legislative and financial matters.
viii) It deals with all foreign policies and foreign affairs.
ix) It exercises control over higher appointments like constitutional authorities and senior secretariat administrators.
: THE STATE LEGISLATURE Part - VI of our constitution deals with the government in the states except Jammu and Kashmir, which enjoys special status and has a separate constitution of its own.
Article 168 to 212 of the constitution deal with the organisation, composition, duration, officers, procedures, privileges, power and so on of the state legislature.
ORGANISATION OF STATE LEGISLATURE: There is no uniformity in the organisation of state legislature.
At present, only seven states (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh) have bicameral system.
In such states, the State Legislature consists of the Governor, the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly.
Other twenty-two states have unicameral system which consists of the Governor and the Legislative Assembly.
The Legislative Council/Vidhan Parishad/ Second Chamber/House of Elders is the Upper House, while the Legislative Assembly /Vidhan Sabha/First Chamber/ Popular House is the Lower House.
The Parliament can abolish or create Legislative Council if the Legislative Assembly of the concerned state passes a resolution by a special majority (a majority of the total membership of the assembly and a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the assembly present and voting).
COMPOSITION OF STATE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: STRENGTH: The Legislative Assembly consists of representatives directly elected by the people on the basis of Universal Adult Franchise.
Its strength varies from 60 to 500 depending on the population size of the state.
However, in case of certain states, the strength of the Legislative Assembly is also less than 60.
NOMINATED MEMBER: The Governor can nominate one member from the Anglo- India community, if the community is not adequately represented in the assembly.
TERRITORIAL CONSTITUENCIES: For the purpose of holding direct elections to the assembly, each state is divided into territorial constituencies.
The demarcation of these constituencies is done in such a manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it is the same throughout the state.
RESERVATION OF SCs and STs: The constitution provided for the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of each state on the basis of population ratios.
Originally, this reservation was to operate for ten years, i.e., up to 1960.
But this has been extended continuously since then by 10 years each time and now it is up to 2020.
COMPOSITION OF STATE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL: STRENGTH: The members of the Legislative Council are indirectly elected.
The maximum strength of the council is fixed at one-third of the total strength of the assembly and the minimum strength is fixed at 40.
It means that the size of the council depends on the size of the assembly of the concerned state.
This is done to ensure the predominance of the directly elected house, i.e., State Legislative Assembly, in the legislative affairs of the state.
Though the constitution has fixed the maximum and the minimum limits, the actual strength of a Council is fixed by Parliament.
MANNER OF ELECTION: Of the total number of members of a Legislative council: i) 1/3 are elected by the members of local bodies in the state like municipalities, district boards, etc.
ii) 1/12 are elected by graduates of three years standing and residing within the state.
iii) 1/12 are elected by the teachers of three years standing in the state, not lower in standard than secondary school.
iv) 1/3 are elected by the members of the legislative assembly of the state from amongst persons who are not members of the assembly, and v) The remainder are nominated by the governor from amongst persons who have a special knowledge or practical experience of literature, science, art, cooperative movement and social service.
Thus, 5/6 of the total number of members of a Legislative Council are indirectly elected and 1/6 are nominated by the Governor.
The members are elected in accordance with the System of Proportional Representation by Means of a Single Transferable Vote.
DURATION OF STATE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: The normal term of State Legislative Assembly is five years from the date of its first meeting after the general election.
After five years the State Legislative Assembly will be automatically dissolved.
However, the Governor is authorised to dissolve the State Legislative Assembly at any time (i.e., even before the completion of five years) to pave the way for fresh elections.
Further, the term of the State Legislative Assembly can be extended during the period of National Emergency by a law of Parliament for one year at a time (for any length of time).
However, this extension cannot continue beyond a period of six months after the emergency has ceased to operate.
DURATION OF STATE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL: The State Legislative Council is a continuing chamber, i.e., it is a permanent body and is not subject to dissolution.
But one -third of its members retire every second year.
A member continues for six years.
The vacant seats are filled up by fresh elections and nominations (by Governor) at the beginning of every third year.
The retiring members are also eligible for re-election and renomination any number of times.
QUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF STATE LEGISLATURE: i.
He must be a citizen of India.
ii.
He must make an oath before the person authorised by the Election Commission to bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution and to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.
iii.
He must be not less than 30 years of age in the case of Legislative Council and not less than 25 years of age in the case of Legislative Assembly.
iv.
He must possess other qualifications prescribed by the Parliament.
DISQUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF STATE LEGISLATURE: A person shall be disqualified for being a member of the State Legislative Assembly or State Legislative Council: i) If he holds any office of profit under the union or state government (except that of a minister or any other office exempted by state legislature) ii) If he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a court.
iii) If he is an insolvent.
iv) If he is not a citizen of India or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign state.
v) If he is so disqualified under any law made by Parliament.
vi) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either house of state legislature if he is so disqualified on the ground of defection under the provision of the Tenth Schedule of the constitution.
OATH 'or' AFFIRMATION: Every member of either house of State Legislature, before taking his seat in the house has to make an oath before the Governor or some person appointed by him for this purpose.
In this oath, a member of the State Legislature swears: i) To bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution of India; ii) To uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India; and iii) To faithfully discharge the duty of his office.
PRESIDING OFFICERS OF STATE LEGISLATURE: Each house of State Legislature has its own Presiding Officer.
There is a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker for the Legislative Assembly and Chairman and a Deputy Chairman for the Legislative Council.
A panel of Chairman for the Legislative Assembly and a panel of Vice-Chairman for the Legislative Council are also appointed.
The panel of Chairmen and the panel of Vice-Chairmen are nominated by the Speaker of the Assembly and the Chairman of the Council respectively.
The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly are elected by the assembly itself from amongst its members.
But the Deputy Speaker is elected after the election of the Speaker has taken place.
The Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council are elected by the Legislative Council itself from amongst its members.
QUORUM: Quorum is the minimum number of members required to be present in the either house of the State Legislature before it can transact any business.
It is ten members or one- tenth of the total number of members of the house (including the Presiding Officer), whichever is greater.
If there is no quorum during a meeting of the house, it is the duty of the Presiding Officer either to adjourn the house or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.
The Governor from time to time summons each house of the State Legislature to meet.
The maximum gap between the two sessions of State Legislature cannot be more than six months, i.e., the State Legislature should meet at least twice a year.
A session of the State Legislature consists of many sittings.
VOTING IN HOUSE: All matters at any sitting of either house are decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting excluding the presiding officer.
Only a few matters which are specially mentioned in the constitution like removal of the Speaker of the assembly, removal of the Chairman of the Legislative Council and so on require special majority, not ordinary majority.
The Presiding Officer does not vote in the first instance, but exercises a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
LANGUAGE IN STATE LEGISLATURE: The constitution has declared the official language (s) of the state or Hindi or English, to be the languages for transacting business in the state legislature.
However, the Presiding Officer can permit a member to address the house in mother-tongue.
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF STATE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: In a real sense, the State Legislature means its Legislative Assembly.
State Legislative Assembly has the following important functions and powers: i) It can make laws on any subject provided in the State List.
It can also make a law on a subject in the Concurrent List but it should not come in conflict with a law already made by the Parliament.
ii) It has the control over the Council of Ministers.
Its members may ask questions to the ministers, introduce a resolution and may pass a vote to dismiss the state government.
The ministry is collectively responsible to the Assembly.
The defeat of the ministry in the Assembly amounts to the passing of a vote of no-confidence against it.
iii) It controls the finances of the state.
A money bill can originate in the Legislative Assembly.
A money bill is treated as passed by the Legislative Council after a lapse of 14 days after reference made to Legislative Council by the Legislative Assembly.
No tax can be imposed or withdrawn without the approval of the Legislative Assembly.
iv) The State Legislative Assembly elects its own Speaker and Deputy Speaker and may remove them by a Vote of No-Confidence.
It takes part in the election of the President of India.
It considers reports submitted by various independent agencies like the State Public Service Commission, Auditor-General and others.
v) It has constituent powers too.
According to Article 368, a bill of Constitutional Amendment first passed by the Parliament shall be referred to the states for approval.
The Legislative Assembly has to give its verdict by passing a resolution by its simple majority showing approval or disapproval of the said bill.
The President shall refer to the Legislative Assembly of the concerned state a bill desiring change in its boundary lines for obtaining its views in this regard before he recommends that such a bill be introduced in the Parliament.
The State Legislative Assembly is thus the popular and more powerful chamber of the State Legislature.
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL: The legislative council plays a more advisory role.
A bill other than a money bill, may originate in the State Legislative Council.
Over legislative matters, Legislative Council has only a suspensive veto for a maximum period of four months.
Over financial matters, its powers are not absolute.
The Legislative Council may detain a Money Bill only for period of fourteen days.
There is no provision for a joint sitting of Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council to resolve a deadlock between them, over the legislative matters, if any.
Thus, the Legislative Council is only a subordinate component of the Legislature.
STATE EXECUTIVE Article 153 to 167 in Part VI of the constitution deal with the State Executive.
The State Executive consists of the Governor, the Chief Minister, the Council of Ministers and the Advocate General of the State.
GOVERNOR: The Governor is the Chief Executive Head of the state.
He is the nominal executive head (titular or constitutional head.)
The Governor also acts as an agent of the Central Government.
Therefore, the office of a Governor has a dual role.
Usually, there is one Governor for each state, but if required the same person may act as a Governor for two or more states.
APPOINTMENT OF GOVERNOR: The Governor is appointed by the President.
In a way, he is a nominee of the Central Government.
The office of the Governor is an independent constitutional office and is not under the control of or subordinate to the Central Government.
The constitution lays down only two qualifications for the appointment of a person as a governor.
These are: i) He should be a citizen of India.
ii) He should have completed the age of 35 years.
Additionally, two conventions have also developed in this regard over the years.
First, he should not belong to the state where he is appointed, so that he is free from local politics.
Second, while appointing the Governor, the President has to consult the Chief Minister of the state concerned, so that smooth functioning of the constitutional machinery in the state is ensured.
CONDITIONS OF GOVERNOR'S OFFICE: i) He should not be a member of either house of the Parliament or a house of State Legislature.
If any such person is appointed as Governor, he has to vacate his seat in that House before assuming the office of the Governor.
ii) He should not hold any office of profit.
iii) He is entitled to use his official residence (the Raj Bhavan) without payment of rent.
iv) He gets emoluments, allowances and privileges as determined by the Parliament.
v) When the same person is appointed as the Governor of two or more states, the emoluments and allowances payable to him are shared by the states as decided by the President.
vi) His emoluments and allowances cannot be reduced during his term of office.
OATH 'OR' AFFIRMATION BY THE GOVERNOR: Before entering upon his office, Governor has to take an oath.
In his oath, the governor swears: i) To faithfully execute the office; ii) To preserve, protect and defend the constitution and the law; iii) To devote himself to the service and well-being of the people of the state.
The oath of office to the Governor is administered by the Chief Justice of the concerned State High Court and in his absence, the senior most judge of that court available.
Every person discharging the functions of the Governor also undertakes the similar oath.
TERM OF GOVERNOR'S OFFICE: A Governor holds office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
However, this term of five years is subject to the pleasure of the President.
Further, he can resign at any time by addressing a resignation letter to the President.
The Governor has no security of tenure and no fixed term of office.
He may be removed by the President at any time.
The President may transfer a Governor appointed to one state to another state for the rest of the term.
Further, a Governor whose term has expired may be reappointed in the same state or any other state.
A Governor can hold office beyond his term of five years until his successor assumes charge.
The underlying idea is that there must be a Governor in the state and there cannot be an interregnum.
In case of the death of a sitting Governor, the Chief Justice of the concerned State High Court may be appointed by the President temporarily to discharge the functions of the Governor of that state.
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNOR: 1) EXECUTIVE POWERS: i) All executive actions of the government of a state are formally taken in his name.
ii) He can make rules for more convenient transaction of the business of a state government.
iii) He appoints the Chief Minister and other ministers.
They also hold office during his pleasure.
iv) He appoints the Advocate General of a state and determines his remuneration.
The Advocate General holds the office during the pleasure of the Governor.
v) He appoints the State Election Commissioner and determines his conditions of service and tenure of office.
However, the State Election Commissioner can be removed as a judge of a High Court is removed.
vi) He appoints the Chairman and members of the State Public Service Commission.
However, they can be removed only by the President and not by a Governor.
vii) He can seek any information relating to the administration of the state and proposals for legislation from the Chief Minister.
viii) He can recommend the imposition of State Emergency in the state to the President.
During this period, the Governor enjoys extensive executive powers as an agent of the President.
ix) He acts as the Chancellor of universities in the state.
He also appoints the Vice-Chancellors of universities in the state.
2) LEGISLATIVE POWERS: A Governor is an integral part of the State Legislature.
In that capacity, he has the following legislative powers and functions: i) He can summon or prorogue the State Legislature and dissolve the State Legislative Assembly.
ii) He can address the State Legislature at the commencement of the first session after each general election and first session of each year.
iii) He can send messages to the house or houses of the State Legislature, with respect to a bill pending in the legislature.
iv) He can appoint any member of the State Legislative Assembly to preside over its proceedings when the offices of both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker fall vacant.
Similarly, he can appoint any member of the State Legislative Council to preside over its proceedings when the offices of both the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman fall vacant.
v) He nominates one-sixth of the members of the State Legislative Council from amongst persons having special knowledge or practical experience in literature, science, art, cooperative movement and social service.
vi) He can nominate one member to the State Legislative Assembly from the Anglo-Indian Community.
vii) He decides on the question of disqualification of members of the State Legislature in consultation with the Election Commission.
viii) He lays the reports of the State Finance Commission, the State Public Service Commission and the Comptroller and Auditor-General relating to the accounts of the state, before the State Legislature.
ix) He can promulgate ordinances when the State Legislature is not in session.
These ordinances must be approved by the State Legislature within six weeks from its reassembly.
He can also withdraw an ordinance any time.
x) When a bill is sent to the Governor after it is passed by the State Legislature, he can give his assent to the bill, or withhold his assent to the bill, or return the bill (if it is not a Money Bill) for reconsideration at the State Legislature.
However, if the bill is passed again by the State Legislature with or without amendments, the Governor has to give his assent to the bill, or reserve the bill for the consideration of the President if the bill passed by the State Legislature endangers the position of the High Court or the bill is against the provisions of the Constitution or opposed to the Directive Principles of State Policy or against the interest of the country.
3) FINANCIAL POWERS: The financial powers and functions of the Governor are: i) He sees that the Annual Budget is laid before the State Legislature.
ii) Money bills can be introduced in the State Legislature only with his prior recommendation.
iii) No demand for a grant can be made except on his recommendation.
iv) He can make advances out of the Contingency Fund of the State to meet any unforeseen expenditure.
v) He constitutes a Finance Commission after every five years to review the financial position of the panchayats and municipalities.
4) JUDICIAL POWERS: i) He is consulted by the President while appointing the judges of the concerned State High Court.
ii) He makes appointments, postings and promotions of the District Judges in consultations with the High Court.
iii) He also appoints persons to the Judicial Service of the state in consultation with the High Court and the State Public Service Commission.
iv) He can pardon, acquit, relieve, remit, suspend or convert the punishment of any person.
He cannot pardon a death sentence.
This power lies with the President only.
CHIEF MINISTER: The Governor is the nominal executive authority (de jure executive) and the Chief Minister is the real executive authority (de facto executive).
In other words, the Governor is the head of the state while the Chief Minister is the head of the government.
Thus, the position of the Chief Minister at the state level is analogous to the position of Prime Minister at the centre.
APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF MINISTER: The Governor appoints the leader of the majority party or coalition in the state legislative assembly as the Chief Minister and ask him to seek a vote of confidence in the house within a month.
The Governor may exercise his individual judgement in the selection and appointment of the Chief Minister when the Chief Minister in office dies suddenly.
However, on the death of a Chief Minister, the ruling party usually elects a new leader and the Governor has no choice but to appoint him as Chief Minister.
The Governor first appoints him as the Chief Minister and then ask him to prove his majority in the Legislative Assembly within a reasonable period.
A person who is not a member of the State Legislature can be appointed as the Chief Minister for six months, within which time, he should be elected to the State Legislature, failing which he ceases to be the Chief Minister.
OATH BY THE CHIEF MINISTER: Before the Chief Minister enters his office, the Governor administers to him the oaths of office and secrecy.
In his oath of office, the Chief Ministers swears: i) To bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution of India, ii) To uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, iii) To faithfully discharge the duties of his office, and iv) To do right to all people in accordance with the constitution and law.
In his oath of secrecy, the Chief Minister swears that he will not directly or indirectly reveal to any person(s) any matter.
TERM OF CHIEF MINISTER: The term of the Chief Minister is not fixed and he holds office during the pleasure of the Governor.
However, this does not mean that the Governor can dismiss him at any time.
He cannot be dismissed by the Governor as long as he enjoys the majority support in the Legislative Assembly.
But if he loses the confidence of the assembly, he must resign or the Governor can dismiss him.
SALARY & ALLOWANCES: The salary and allowances of the Chief Minister are determined by the State Legislature.
In addition to the salary and allowances, he gets a sumptuary allowance, free accommodation, travelling allowance, medical facilities, etc.
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF CHIEF MINISTER: 1) IN RELATION TO COUNCIL OF MINISTERS: i) The Governor appoints only those persons as ministers who are recommended by the Chief Minister.
ii) He allocates and reshuffles the portfolios among the ministers.
iii) He can ask a minister to resign or advise the Governor to dismiss him in case of difference of opinion.
iv) He presides over the meeting of the Council of Ministers and influences its decisions.
v) He guides, directs, controls and coordinates the activities of all the ministers.
vi) As the Chief Minister is the head of the Council of Ministers, his resignation or death automatically dissolves the Council of Ministers.
The resignation or death of any other minister, on the other hand, merely creates a vacancy, which the Chief Minister may or may not fill.
2) IN RELATION TO THE GOVERNOR: i) He advises the Governor with regard to the appointment of important officials like Advocate General, Chairman and members of the State Public Service Commission, State Election Commissioner, and so on.
ii) He is the principal channel of communication between the Governor and the Council of Ministers iii) He communicates all decisions of the Council of Ministers to the Governor.
iv) It is the duty of the Chief Minister to furnish such information relating to the administration of the state and proposal for legislation as the Governor calls for.
3) IN RELATION TO STATE LEGISLATURE: i) He advises the Governor with regard to the summoning and proroguing of the sessions of the State Legislature.
ii) He can recommend the dissolution of the Legislative Assembly to the Governor at any time.
iii) He announces the government policies on the floor of the house.
4) OTHER POWERS and FUNCTIONS: i) He is the Chairman of the State Planning Board.
ii) He is a member of the Inter-State Council and the National Development Council, both headed by the Prime Minister.
iii) He is the Crisis Manager at the political level during emergencies.
iv) As a leader of the state he meets various sections of the people and receives memoranda from them regarding their problems, and so on.
Thus, he plays a very significant and highly crucial role in the state administration.
STATE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS: The Council of Ministers headed by the Chief Minister is the real executive authority in the politico-administrative system of a state.
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS: i) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister as the head to aid and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions.
ii) The advice tendered by ministers to the Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.
iii) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister.
iv) The total number of ministers, including the Chief Minister, shall not exceed 15 percent of the total strength of the Legislative Assembly of that state.
But the number of ministers, including the Chief Minister, in a state shall not be less than 12. v) The ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor.
vi) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the State Legislative Assembly.
vii) The Governor shall administer the oaths of office and secrecy to a minister.
viii) A minister who is not a member of the State Legislature for any period of six consecutive months shall cease to be a minister.
ix) The salaries and allowances of ministers shall be determined by the State Legislature.
x) All executive actions of the state government shall be taken in the name of the Governor.
xi) It is the duty of the Chief Minister to communicate all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the state and proposals for legislation to the Governor.
xii) Every minister shall have the right to speak and take part in the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly/ Legislative Council and any committee of the State Legislature.
NATURE OF ADVICE BY MINISTERS: Article 163 provides for a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister as the head to aid and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions except the discretionary ones.
The nature of advice tendered by ministers to the Governor cannot be enquired by any court.
This provision emphasises the intimate and confidential relationship between the Governor and the minister.
A Council of Ministers must always exist to advise the Governor, even after the dissolution of the State Legislative Assembly or resignation of a Council of Ministers.
Hence, the existing ministry may continue in the office until its successor assumes charge.
APPOINTMENT OF MINISTERS: The Chief Minister is appointed by the Governor.
The other ministers are appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister.
This means that the Governor can appoint only those persons as ministers who are recommended by the Chief Minister.
But, there should be a Tribal Welfare Minister in Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha.
Usually the members of the State Legislature are appointed as ministers.
A person who is not a member of either house of the State Legislature can also be appointed as a minister.
But, within six months, he must become a member of either house of the State Legislature, otherwise, he ceases to be a minister.
A minister who is a member of one house of the State Legislature has the right to speak and to take part in the proceedings of the other house.
But, he can vote only in the house of which he is a member.
OATH OF MINISTERS: Before a minister enters upon his office, the Governor administers to him the oaths of office and secrecy.
In his oath of office, the minister swears: i) To bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution of India, ii) To uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, iii) To faithfully and carefully discharge the duties of his office, and iv) To do right to all people in accordance with the constitution and law, without fear and favour, affection or ill-will.
In his oath of secrecy, the minister swears that he will not directly or indirectly reveal to any person(s) any matter that is known to him as a minister except as may be required for the due discharge of his duties as such minister.
SALARY OF MINISTERS: The salaries and allowances of ministers are determined by the state legislature from time to time.
A minister gets the salary and allowances which are payable to a member of the state legislature.
Additionally, he gets a sumptuary allowance (according to his rank) free accommodation, travelling allowance, medical facilities, etc.
COLLECTIVE RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTERS: Article 164 clearly states that the Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the state.
This means that all the ministers own joint responsibility to the Legislative Assembly for all their acts of omission and commission.
They work as a team and swim or sink together.
When the Legislative Assembly passes a no-confidence motion against the Council of Ministers, all the ministers have to resign.
Alternatively, the Council of Ministers can advise the Governor to dissolve the Legislative Assembly and call for fresh elections.
The principle of collective responsibility also means that the Cabinet decisions bind all Cabinet ministers and other ministers even if they differ in the Cabinet meeting.
It is the duty of every minister to stand by the Cabinet decision and support them both within and outside the State Legislature.
If any minister disagrees with a Cabinet decision and is not prepared to defend it, he must resign.
Several ministers have resigned in the past owing to their differences.
INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY OF MINISTER: Article 164 also contains the principle of individual responsibility of a minister.
It states that the ministers hold office during the pleasure of the Governor.
This means that the Governor can remove a minister at a time when the Council of Ministers enjoys the confidence of the Legislative Assembly.
But, the Governor can remove a minister only on the advice of the Chief Minister.
In case of difference of opinion or dissatisfaction with the performance of a minister, the Chief Minister can ask him to resign or advise the Governor to dismiss him.
By exercising this power, the Chief Minister can ensure the realisation of the rule of collective responsibility.
COMPOSITION OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS: The Chief Minister determines the size of the State Council of Ministers according to the exigencies of time and requirements of the situation.
The Council of Ministers consists of three categories of ministers, namely, Cabinet Ministers, Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers.
The Chief Minister is the supreme governing authority in the state.
The Cabinet ministers head the important departments of the state government like home, education, finance, agriculture and so forth.
They are members of the Cabinet, attend its meetings and play an important role in deciding policies.
The Ministers of State can either be given independent charge of departments or can be attached to Cabinet ministers.
However, they are not members of the Cabinet and do not attend the Cabinet meetings unless specially invited when something related to their departments are considered by the Cabinet.
Next in rank are the Deputy ministers who are not given independent charge of departments.
They are attached to the Cabinet ministers and assist them in their administrative, political and parliamentary duties.
They are not members of the Cabinet and do not attend Cabinet meetings.
At times, the Council of Ministers may also include a Deputy Chief Minister.
The Deputy Chief Minister is appointed mostly for local political reasons.
STATE CABINET: Cabinet is a smaller body which is the nucleus of the Council of Ministers.
It consists of only the Cabinet ministers.
It is the real centre of authority in the state government which performs the following functions: i) It is the highest decision-making authority in the politico-administrative system of a state.
ii) It is the chief policy formulating body of the state government.
iii) It is the supreme executive authority of the state government.
iv) It is the chief coordinator of the state administration.
v) It is an advisory body to the Governor.
vi) It is the chief crisis manager and thus deals with all emergency situations.
vii) It deals with all major legislative and financial matters.
viii) It exercises control over higher appointments like constitutional authorities and senior secretariat administrators.
CABINET COMMITTEES: The Cabinet works through various committees called Cabinet Committees which are Standing Committee and Adhoc Committee.
The Standing Cabinet Committee is of a permanent nature but the Adhoc Cabinet Committee is of a temporary nature.
These committees are set up by the Chief Minister according to the exigencies of time and requirement of the situation.
These committees not only sort out issues and formulate proposals for the consideration of the Cabinet but also take decisions.
However, the Cabinet can review the decisions of various Cabinet Committee.
: AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION The constitution of India provides for its amendment in order to adjust itself to the changing conditions and needs.
Article 368 of the constitution deals with the powers of Parliament to amend the constitution and its procedure but, the Parliament cannot amend the basic structure of the constitution.
PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENT: The procedure for the amendment of the constitution is as follows: i) An amendment of the constitution can be initiated by the introduction of a bill in either house of the Parliament and not in the State Legislatures.
ii) The bill can be introduced either by a minister or by a private member and does not require prior permission of the President.
iii) The bill must be passed in each house by a special majority, that is, a majority of the total membership of the house and a majority of two-thirds of the members of the house present and voting.
iv) Each house must pass the bill separately.
In case of a disagreement between the two houses, there is no provision for holding a joint sitting of the two houses for the purpose of deliberation and passage of the bill.
v) If the bill seeks to amend the federal provisions of the constitution, it must also be approved by the State Legislatures of half of the states by a simple majority, that is, a majority of the members of the house present and voting.
vi) After duly passed by both the houses of Parliament and approved by the State Legislatures, the bill is presented to the President for assent.
vii) The President must give his assent to the bill.
He can neither withhold his assent to the bill nor return the bill for reconsideration of the Parliament.
viii) After the President's assent, the bill becomes a Constitutional Amendment Act.
and the constitution stands amended.
TYPES OF AMENDMENT: Constitution can be amended in following three ways: 1.
AMENDMENT BY SIMPLE MAJORITY OF THE PARLIAMENT: The following provisions in the constitution can be amended by a simple majority of the two houses of Parliament: i) Establishment of new states.
ii) Formation of new states and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing states.
iii) Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in states.
iv) Emoluments, allowances, privileges and so on of the President, the Governors, the Speaker, Judges, etc.
v) Quorum in Parliament vi) Salaries and allowances of the members of Parliament.
vii) Procedure in Parliament viii) Privileges of the Parliament, its members and its committees.
ix) Use of English language in Parliament x) Citizenship acquisition and termination xii) Conferment of more jurisdiction on the Supreme Court xiii) Elections to Parliament and State Legislatures xiv) Delimitation of constituencies xv) Union territories xvi) Use of official language 2.
AMENDMENT BY SPECIAL MAJORITY OF THE PARLIAMENT: The majority of the provisions in the constitution need to be amended by a special majority of the Parliament, that is, a majority (that is more than 50 percent) of the total membership of each house and a majority of two-thirds of the members of each house present and voting.
The provisions which can be amended by this way includes: i) Fundamental Rights: ii) Directive Principles of State Policy; and iii) All other provisions which are not covered by the first and third categories.
3.
AMENDMENT BY SPECIAL MAJORITY OF PARLIAMENT AND CONSENT OF STATES: Those provisions of the constitution which are related to the Federal Structure can be amended by a special majority of the Parliament and also with the consent of half of the State Legislatures by a simple majority.
There is no time limit within which the states should give their consent to the bill.
The following provisions can be amended in this way: i) Election of the President and its manner.
ii) Extent of the executive power of the union and the states iii) Supreme Court and High Courts iv) Distribution of legislative powers between the union and states v) Any of the matters in seventh schedule vi) Representation of states in Parliament vii) Power of Parliament to amend the constitution and its procedure (Article 368 itself) The amendment procedure of Indian constitution has been criticised.
Despite the criticisms the amendment process has proved to be simple and easy and has succeeded in meeting the changed needs and conditions.
The procedure is also not so flexible as to allow the ruling parties to change it according to their whims.
Nor is it so rigid as to be incapable of adopting itself to the changing needs.
Constitution of India strikes a good balance between flexibility and rigidity.
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS: The emergency provisions are in Part-XVIII of the constitution, from Articles 352 to 360 which enable the Central Government to meet any abnormal situation effectively.
The reason behind these provisions is to safeguard the sovereignty, unity, integrity and security of the country, the democratic political system, and the constitution.
During an Emergency, the Central Government becomes all powerful and the States go in to the total control of the Centre.
It converts the federal structure into a unitary one without a formal amendment of the constitution.
This kind of transformation of the political system from federal during normal times to unitary during emergency is a unique feature of the Indian constitution.
The constitution specifies following three types of emergencies: 1.NATIONAL EMERGENCY: GROUNDS OF DECLARATION: Under Article 352, the President can declare a National Emergency when the security of India or a part of it is threatened by war or external aggression or armed rebellion.
The President can declare a National Emergency even before the actual occurrence of war or external aggression or armed rebellion, if he is satisfied that there is imminent danger.
When a national emergency is declared on the ground of 'war' or 'external aggression', it is known as 'External Emergency'.
On the other hand, it is declared on the ground of 'armed rebellion', it is known as 'Internal Emergency'.
A proclamation of National Emergency may be applicable to the entire country or a part of it.
The President can declare a National Emergency only after receiving a written recommendation from the Cabinet and not merely on the advice of the Prime Minister.
PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL AND DURATION: The proclamation of emergency must be approved by both the houses of Parliament within one month from the date of its issue.
However, if the declaration of emergency is issued at a time when the Lok Sabha has been dissolved or dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes place during the period of one month without approving the proclamation, then the proclamation survives until 30 days from the first sitting of the Lok Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the Rajya Sabha has in the meantime approved it.
If approved by both the houses of Parliament, the emergency continues for six months, and can be extended to an indefinite period with an approval of the Parliament for every six months.
Every resolution approving the declaration of emergency or its continuance must be passed by either house of Parliament by a special majority.
CANCELATION OF PROCLAMATION: A declaration of emergency may be canceled by the President at any time by a subsequent declaration.
Such a declaration does not require the parliamentary approval.
Further, the President must cancel a declaration if the Lok Sabha passes a resolution disapproving its continuation.
A resolution of disapproval is different from a resolution approving the continuation of a declaration of National Emergency in the following two respects: i) A resolution of disapproval to National Emergency is required to be passed by the Lok Sabha only, while continuation of National Emergency needs to be passed by both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
ii) A resolution of disapproval to National Emergency is to be adopted by a Simple Majority only, while continuation of National Emergency needs to be adopted by a Special Majority.
EFFECTS OF NATIONAL EMERGENCY: (A)EFFECT ON THE CENTRE-STATE RELATIONS: i) EXECUTIVE: In normal times, the centre can give executive directions to state only on certain specified matters but during a National Emergency, the centre gives executive directions to a state on any matter.
Thus, the state governments are under the complete control of the centre, though they are not suspended.
ii) LEGISLATIVE: During a National Emergency, the Parliament is empowered to make laws on any subject mentioned in the State List.
The constitution becomes unitary rather than federal during National Emergency.
The laws made by the Parliament on the state subjects during a National Emergency becomes inoperative six months after the emergency has ceased to operate.
During National Emergency, the President can issue ordinances on the state subject, if the Parliament is not in session.
iii) FINANCIAL: During the National Emergency, the President can modify the distribution of revenues between the centre and the states.
Such modifications continue till the end of the financial year in which the emergency ceases to operate.
(B) EFFECT ON THE LIFE OF THE LOK SABHA AND STATE ASSEMBLY: During National Emergency, the life of the Lok Sabha may be extended for any length of time beyond its normal term (five years).
The extension will be for one year at a time.
Similarly, Parliament may extend the normal tenure of a State Legislative Assembly (five years) by one year each time (for any length of time) during a National Emergency.
(C) EFFECT ON THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS: During National Emergency, the fundamental rights under Article 19 are automatically suspended.
When the National Emergency ceases to operate, Article 19 automatically revives and comes into force.
The legislative and executive actions taken during the National Emergency cannot be challenged even after the emergency ceases to operate.
The President cannot suspend the fundamental rights like the Right to protection in respect of conviction for offences (Article 20) and the Right to life and personal liberty (Article 21) even during emergency.
2) STATE EMERGENCY/PRESIDENT'S RULE/ CONSTITUTIONAL EMERGENCY: Grounds of Imposition: The Central Government takes over a State Government under Article 356 in case of failure of constitutional machinery in the State which is known as 'State Emergency'.
This can be declared under the following grounds: i) If the President is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the state government cannot be carried on according to the provisions of the constitution.
The President can act either on a report of the Governor of the state or without the Governor's report.
ii) Whenever a state fails to comply with any direction from the centre.
PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL AND DURATION: President's Rule must be approved by both the houses of Parliament within two months from the date of its issue.
If approved by both the houses of Parliament, the President's Rule continues for six months.
It can be extended for a maximum period of three years with the approval of the Parliament, every six months.
Every resolution approving the declaration of President's Rule or its continuation can be passed by either house of Parliament only by a simple majority.
A declaration of President's Rule may be cancelled by the President at any time by a subsequent declaration.
Such a declaration does not require the parliamentary approval.
CONSEQENCES OF STATE EMERGENCY: i)The President takes up the functions of the State Government.
ii) The powers of the State Legislature are to be exercised by the Parliament.
iii) The President dismisses the State Council of Ministers headed by the Chief Minister.
The Governor carries on the state administration with the help of the Chief Secretary of the state or the advisor appointed by the President.
The President either suspends or dissolves the State Legislative Assembly and passes the state legislative bills and the state budget.
3) FINANCIAL EMERGENCY: Article 360 empowers the President to declare a Financial Emergency if he feels that a situation has arisen due to which the financial stability or credit of India or any part of its territory is threatened.
PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL and DURATION: A declaration of financial emergency must be approved by both the houses of Parliament within two months from the date of issue.
However, if the declaration of Financial Emergency is issued at a time when the Lok Sabha has been dissolved or the dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes place during the period of two months without approving the proclamation, then the proclamation survives until 30 days from the first sitting of the Lok Sabha.
Once approved by both the houses of Parliament, the Financial Emergency continues indefinitely till it is cancelled.
Repeated parliamentary approval is not required for its continuation.
A resolution approving the declaration of Financial Emergency can be passed by either house of Parliament only by a simple majority.
A proclamation of Financial Emergency may be cancelled by the President any time by a subsequent declaration.
Such a declaration does not require the parliamentary approval.
EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL EMERGENCY: i) The President may direct to reduce salaries and allowances of all persons serving the state and the union, and the judges of the Supreme Court and the High Court.
The President may reserve all money bills and financial bills for his consideration after they are passed by the State Legislature.
Thus, during Financial Emergency, the centre has full control over the States in financial matters.
No financial emergency has been declared so far.
CRITICISM OF THE EMERGENCY PROVISIONS: Emergency provisions are criticised on the following grounds: i) The federal character of the constitution is destroyed and the Union becomes all powerful.
ii) The powers of the Union and the States are in the hands of the Union Executive.
iii) The President becomes a dictator.
iv) The financial autonomy of the State is abolished.
v) Fundamental Rights become meaningless and the democratic foundation of the constitution is destroyed.
While protecting the emergency provisions, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar also accepted the possibility of their misuse.
SCHEME OF THE RIGHT TO EQUALITY: Articles 14 to 19 of Indian constitution deal with the Right to Equality.
The Scheme of the Fundamental Right to Equality is explained as follows: 1.
EQUALITY BEFORE LAW AND EQUAL PROTECTION OF LAW: Article 14 says that the state shall not deny to any person equality before the law and the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.
This provision is granted to all citizens or foreigners.
Moreover, the word 'person' also includes legal persons, viz, statutory corporations, companies, registered societies, etc.
Equality before Law implies: (a) Absence of any special privileges in favour of any person, (b) Equal subjection of all persons to the law administered by courts, and (c) No person is above the law.
On the other hand, Equal Protection of Law implies: (a) Equality of treatment under equal circumstances, (b) Similar application of the same laws to all persons who are similarly situated, and (c) The like should be treated alike without any discrimination.
Rule of Law: The 'Equality before Law' is an element of 'Rule of Law'.
Rule of Law has the following aspects: a) Absence of arbitrary power, that is, no man can be punished except for a breach of law.
b) Equal subjection of all citizens to the ordinary law administered by the courts.
The Supreme Court held that the 'Rule of Law' as mentioned in Article 14 is a 'basic feature' of the constitution.
Hence, it cannot be destroyed by an amendment.
Exceptions to Equality: a) The President of India and the Governors enjoy the following immunities (Article 361): The President or the Governor is not answerable to any court for the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of his office.
No civil or criminal proceedings shall be instituted or continued against the President or the Governor during his term of office.
No process for the arrest or imprisonment of the President or the Governor shall be issued from any court during his term of office.
b) No member of Parliament and member of State Legislature in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee there of (Article-105).
c) The foreign rulers, ambassadors and diplomats enjoy immunity from criminal and civil proceedings.
d) The UNO and its agencies enjoy the diplomatic immunity.
2.
PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION ON CERTAIN GROUNDS: Article 15 provides that the state shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.
The word 'only' implies that discrimination on other grounds is not prohibited.
Citizen cannot be restricted on the basis of religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth with regard to access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment; or the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads, places and public resort maintained by state funds or dedicated to the use of general public.
Exceptions to the General Rule of Non-Discrimination: a) The state can make special provision for women and children, e.g., reservation of seats for women in local bodies or provision of free education for children.
b) The state can make special provision for the advancement of Socially and Educationally Backward Classes or for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, e.g., reservation of seats or fee concessions in educational institutions, except the minority educational institutions.
3.
EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY IN PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT: Article 16 provides for equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters of employment.
No citizen can be discriminated against or be ineligible for any employment on grounds of only religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth or residence.
Exception: The state can reserve posts in favour of any backward class that is not adequately represented in the state services.
4.
ABOLITION OF UNTOUCHABILITY: Article 17 abolishes 'untouchability' and forbids its practice in any form.
Untouchability shall be an offence which is punishable in accordance with law.
In 1976, the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955, has been amended and renamed as the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955, to enlarge the scope and make penal provisions more stringent.
The act defines Civil Right as any right accruing to a person due to abolition of untouchability.
The term 'untouchability' has not been defined either in the constitution or in the Act.
It refers to the social disabilities imposed on certain classes of persons by reason of their birth in certain castes.
Under the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955, the offences committed on the ground of untouchability are punishable either by imprisonment up to six months or by fine up to Rs.
500/- or both.
A person convicted of the offence of 'untouchability' is disqualified for election to the Parliament or State Legislature.
The Act declares the following activities as offences: a) Preventing any person from entering any place of public worship or from worshipping there in; b) Justifying untouchability on traditional, religious, philosophical or other grounds; c) Denying access to any shop, hotel or places of public entertainment; d) Insulting a person belonging to Scheduled Caste on the ground of untouchability; e) Refusing to admit persons in hospitals, educational institutions or hostels established for public benefit; f) Preaching untouchability directly or indirectly; and g) Refusing to sell goods or render services to any person.
It is the constitutional obligation of the state to take necessary action to ensure that Right under Article 17 is not violated.
5.
ABOLITION OF TITLES: Article 18 abolishes titles and makes following provisions in this regard: a) It prohibits the state from conferring any title (except a military or academic distinction) on anybody, whether a citizen or a foreigner.
b) It prohibits a citizen of India from accepting any title from any foreign state.
c) A foreigner holding any office of profit or trust under the state cannot accept any title from any foreign state without the consent of the President.
d) No citizen or foreigner holding any office of profit or trust under the state cannot accept any presentation or emolument from any foreign state without the consent of the President.
From the above, it is clear that the hereditary titles of nobility like Maharaja, Raj Bahadur, Rai Bahadur, Rai Saheb, Dewan Bahadur, etc.
which were conferred by colonial states are banned by Article 18 as these are against the principles of equal status of all.
In 1996, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity of the National Awards: Bharat Ratna, Padma Vibhusana, Padma Bhusan and Padma Sri.
It ruled that these awards do not amount to 'titles' within the meaning of Article 18 that prohibits only heredity titles of nobility.
Therefore, they are not violative of Article 18.
However, it is the rule that they should not be used as suffixes or prefixes to the names of awardees.
Otherwise, they will forfeit the awards.
SCHEME OF THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO CERTAIN FREEDOM UNDER ARTICLE 19: The right to freedom in Article 19 guarantees the six freedoms to the citizens of India.
These six rights are protected against only state action and not private individuals.
Moreover, these rights are available only to the citizens and to the shareholders of a company but not to the foreigners or legal persons like companies or corporations, etc.
The state can impose 'reasonable' restrictions on the enjoyment of these six rights only on certain grounds.
All such rights are explained in detail as follows: i.
FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION: It implies that every citizen has the right to express his views, opinions, belief and convictions freely by word of mouth, writing, printing, picturing or in any other manner.
The freedom of speech and expression includes the following: a) Right to propagate one's views as well as views of others.
b) Freedom of the press.
c) Freedom of commercial advertisement.
d) Right against tapping of telephonic conversation.
e) Right to telecast.
f) Right against bandh called by a political party or organisation.
g) Right to know about government activities.
h) Freedom of silence i) Right against imposition of pre-censorship on a newspaper.
j) Right to demonstration or picketing but not right to strike.
The state can impose reasonable restrictions on the freedom of speech and expression on the grounds of sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the state, public order, decency or morality, contempt of court, defamation, and encouragement to an offence.
ii.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY: Every citizen has the right to assemble peacefully and without arms.
It includes the right to hold public meetings, demonstrations and take out processions only on public land and the assembly must be peaceful and unarmed.
This provision does not protect violent, disorderly, riotous assemblies, or one that causes breach of public peace or one that involves arms.
This right does not include the right to strike.
The state can impose reasonable restrictions on the exercise of right of assembly on two grounds, namely, sovereignty and integrity of India and public order including the maintenance of traffic in the area concerned.
Under Section 144 of Criminal Procedure Code, a magistrate can restrain an assembly, meeting or procession if there is a risk of obstruction, danger to human life, health or safety or a disturbance of the public tranquillity or a riot or any attack.
Under Section 141 of the Indian Penal Code, as assembly of five or more persons becomes unlawful if the object is (a) to restrict the execution of any law or legal process; (b) to forcibly occupy the property of some persons; (c) to commit any mischief; (d) to force some person to do an illegal act; and (e) to threaten the government or its officials on exercising lawful powers.
iii.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION: All citizens have the right to form and continue with associations or unions or cooperative societies.
It includes the right to form political parties, companies, partnership firms, societies, clubs, organisations, trade unions or anybody of persons.
Further, it covers the negative right of not to form or join an association or union.
Reasonable restrictions can be imposed on the exercise of this right by the state on the grounds of sovereignty and integrity of India, public order and morality.
However, the right to obtain recognition of the association is not a fundamental right.
The Supreme Court held that the trade unions have no right to effective bargaining or right to strike or right to declare a lock-out.
iv.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT: Every citizen can move freely throughout the territory of the country.
He can move freely from one place to another.
On the grounds of interests of general public and the protection of interests of scheduled tribe reasonable restrictions will be imposed on this freedom.
The entry of outsiders in tribal areas is restricted to protect their culture, language, customs, manners and to safeguard their occupation and properties against exploitation.
The freedom of movement of prostitutes and persons affected by AIDS can be restricted on the ground of public health and in the interest of public morals.
The freedom of movement implies right to move inside the country, right to move out of the country and right to come back to the country.
Article 19 protects only the right to move inside the country.
v. FREEDOM OF RESIDENCE: Every citizen has the right to reside and settle temporarily or permanently in any part of the territory of the country.
This right is intended to remove internal barriers within the country.
This promotes nationalism and avoids narrow mindedness.
The state imposes restrictions in the interest of general public and the protection of scheduled tribes.
The right of outsiders to reside and settle in tribal areas is restricted to protect the culture, language, customs and manners of scheduled tribes and safeguard their traditional vocation and properties against exploitation.
In many parts of the country, the tribals have been permitted to regulate their property rights in accordance with their customary rules and laws.
vi.
FREEDOM OF PROFESSION: Citizens have the right to practise any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business for earning their livelihoods.
The state can impose reasonable restrictions on the exercise of this right in the interest of the general public.
Further, the state is empowered to prescribe professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business.
Thus, no objection can be made when the state carries on a trade, business, industry or service as a monopoly.
The state is not required to justify its monopoly.
This right does not include the right to carry on a profession/ business/trade/ occupation that is immoral or dangerous.
The state can prohibit these or regulate them through licensing.
SCOPE OF THE RIGHT TO LIFE AND PERSONAL LIBERTY UNDER ARTICLE 21: Article 21 declares that the state can deprive the right to life and personal liberty of a person based on a law.
This right is available to both citizens and non-citizens.
The protection under Article 21 is against arbitrary executive action and against arbitrary legislative action.
'Right to life' is not merely confined to animal existence but it includes the right to live with human dignity and all those aspects of life which make a man's life meaningful, complete and worth living.
'Personal Liberty' covers a variety of rights which are enjoyed by a man.
Supreme Court has declared the following rights as part of Article-21: 1) Right to live with human dignity 2) Right to decent environment including pollution free water and air and protection against hazardous industries.
3) Right to livelihood 4) Right to privacy 5) Right to shelter 6) Right to health 7) Right to free education up to 14 years of age 8) Right to free legal aid 9) Right against solitary confinement 10) Right to speedy trial 11) Right against handcuffing 12) Right against inhuman treatment 13) Right against delayed execution 14) Right to travel abroad 15) Right against bonded labour 16) Right against custodial harassment 17) Right to emergency medical aid 18) Right to timely medical treatment in government hospital 19) Right not to be driven out of a state 20) Right to fair trial 21) Right of prisoner to have necessities of life 22) Right of women to be treated with decency and dignity 23) Right against public hanging 24) Right to hearing 25) Right to information 26) Right to reputation 27) Right to appeal from judgement of conviction 28) Right to social security and protection of the family 29) Right to social and economic justice and empowerment 30) Right against bar fetters 31) Right to appropriate life insurance policy 32) Right to sleep 33) Right to freedom from noise pollution 34) Right to electricity RIGHT TO EDUCATION: Article 21 A declares that the state shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years.
This provision makes only elementary education a Fundamental Right and not higher or professional education.
This provision was added by the 86th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2002.
This amendment is a major milestone in the country's aim to achieve 'Education for all'.
Before this amendment, it was a part of Directive Principles of State Policy for which it was not enforceable by the courts.
Now, the state provides early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six years'.
It also added a new fundamental duty under Article 51 A that reads - It is the duty of every citizen of India to provide opportunities for education to his child or ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
This legislation has been made with a belief that the values of equality, social justice, democracy and the creation of a just and humane society can be achieved through the provision of elementary education to all.
LOCAL SELF GOVERNMENT PANCHAYATI RAJ (RURAL LOCAL SELF GOVT.
): Panchayatiraj has been established to build democracy at the grass root level and entrusted with rural development.
It got constitutional status through the 73rd constitutional Amendment Act.
of 1992.
73rd AMENDMENT Act.
of 1992: According to this Act the state governments are to adopt the new Panchayati Raj system.
The provisions of this Act are grouped as compulsory and voluntary.
The compulsory/mandatory/obligatory provisions of the Act are to be included in the state laws and create new panchayati raj system whereas the voluntary provisions are at the discretion of the states.
While adopting the voluntary provisions of the Act, the states have to consider the local geographical factors, political factors, administrative factors, and other factors.
FEATURES OF THE Act: The salient features of the Act are: GRAM SABHA: A panchayat consists of a number of villages.
The Act provides for a Gram Sabha in a village or a group of villages as the foundation of the panchayati raj system.
It is a body consisting of all voters of a village.
Gram Sabha is a village assembly.
It exercises such powers and performs such functions at the village level as the Legislature of a state determines.
THREE-TIER SYSTEM: The Act provides for a three-tier system of panchayati raj in every state, that is, panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels.
This Act brings uniformity in the structure of panchayati raj throughout the country.
ELECTION OF MEMBERS AND CHAIRPERSONS: All the members of panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels shall be elected directly by the people.
Further, the chairperson of panchayats at the intermediate and district levels shall be elected indirectly-by and from among the elected members.
However, the chairperson of a panchayat at the village level shall be elected in the manner as the State Legislature determines.
RESERVATION OF SEATS: This Act provides for the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Schedule Tribes (STs) at all the three levels in proportion of their population to the total population in the panchayat area.
Further, the State Legislature shall provide for the reservation of offices of chairperson in the panchayat at the village or any other level for the SCs and STs.
The Act provides for the reservation of not less than one-third of the total number of seats for women (including the number of seats reserved for woman belonging to SCs and STs).
The Act also authorises the Legislature of a state to make provision for reservation of seats in favour of backward classes.
DURATION OF PANCHAYATS: The Act provides for a five-year term of office to the panchayat at every level.
However, it can be dissolved before the completion of its term.
Further, fresh elections to constitute a panchayat shall be completed (i) before the expiry of its duration of five years; or (ii) in case of dissolution, before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution.
But, where the remainder of the period is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold election for constituting the new panchayat for such period.
DISQUALIFICATIONS: A person shall be disqualified for being a member of panchayat if he is so disqualified under any law made by the State Legislature.
However, no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than 25 years of age if he has attained the age of 21 years.
Further, all questions of disqualifications shall be referred to such authority as the State Legislature determines.
STATE ELECTION COMMISSION: The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls and the conduct of all elections to the panchayats shall be vested in the State Election Commission which is headed by a State Election Commissioner who is appointed by the Governor.
The State Legislature makes provisions with respect to all matters relating to panchayat elections.
POWER AND FUNCTIONS OF PANCHAYAT: The State Legislature empowers the panchayats to function as institutions of self- government.
There will be decentralization of powers and responsibilities upon panchayats to prepare plans for economic development and social justice; and the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as entrusted to them.
FINANCES: The State Legislature authorises a panchayat to levy and collect taxes, duties, tolls and fees.
The State Legislature provides grant-in-aid to the panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the state.
The State Legislature credits all money of the panchayats to the fund which is constituted in the panchayat level.
FINANCE COMMISSION: After every five years, the Governor of a state shall constitute the Finance Commission to review the financial position of the panchayats.
The Finance Commission shall make the following recommendations to the Governor: i) The principles that should govern the distribution of net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees (levied by the state) between the state and panchayats.
ii) Taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to the panchayats.
iii) The principles which should govern the grants-in-aid to the panchayats from the Consolidate Fund of the state.
iv) The measures needed to improve the financial position of the panchayats.
v) Any other matter referred to it by the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the panchayats.
AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS: The State Legislature makes provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.
COMPULSORY/OBLIGATORY/MANDATORY PROVISIONS OF 73rd CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT-Act, 1992: i. Organisation of Gram Sabha in a village or group of villages.
ii.
Establishment of Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels.
iii.
Direct elections to seats in panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels.
iv.
Indirect elections to the post of chairperson of panchayats at the intermediate and district levels.
v. 21 years to be the minimum age for contesting elections to panchayats.
vi.
Reservation of seats (both members and chairpersons) for SCs and STs in panchayats at all three levels.
vii.
Reservation of one third seats (both members and chairpersons) for woman in panchayats at all three levels.
viii.
Fixing tenure of five years for panchayats at all levels and holding fresh elections within six months if these are dissolved.
ix.
Establishment of a State Election Commission for conducting elections to the panchayats.
x.
Constitution of a State Finance Commission after every five years to review the financial position of the panchayats.
VOLUNTARY/DISCRETIONARY/OPTIONAL PROVISIONS OF 73rd CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT-Act, 1992: i.
Giving representation to members of the Parliament and the State Legislature in the panchayats at different levels falling within their constituencies.
ii.
Reservation of seats (both members and chairpersons) for backward classes in panchayats at any level.
iii.
Granting powers and authority to the panchayats to make them autonomous bodies.
iv.
Transfer of powers and responsibilities to panchayats to prepare plans for economic development and social justice.
v. Granting financial powers to the panchayats to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees.
REASONS FOR INEFFECTIVE PERFORMANCE: i.
Lack of Adequate Devolution: Many states have not taken adequate steps to transfer 3 Fs (i.e., Functions, Funds and Functionaries) to the PRIs to enable them to discharge their function.
Some states have also not implemented the steps recommended by State Finance Commissions to ensure the fiscal viability of the PRIs.
ii.
Excessive Control by Bureaucracy: In some states, the Gram Panchayats have been placed in a position of subordination.
Hence, the Gram Panchayat Sarpanches have to spend a lot of time visiting Block offices for funds and technical approval.
These inter actions with the Block office staff alter the role of Sarpanches as elected representatives.
iii.
Reluctance to use Fiscal Powers: An important power transferred to Gram Panchayat is the right to levy tax on property, business, markets, fairs and also for services provided, like street lighting or public toilets, etc.
Very few panchayats use their fiscal power to levy and collect taxes.
The panchayat heads argue that it is difficult to levy taxes in their constituencies, especially when they live in the community.
iv.
Poor Infrastructure: A large number of elected representatives of PRIs are semi-literate or illiterate and know little about their roles and responsibilities, programmes, procedures, systems.
Due to lack of good, relevant and periodic training, they are not able to perform their functions properly.
MUNICIPALITIES: The system of urban local self-government got constitutional status through the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992.
The state governments are to adopt the new system of municipalities according to this Act which aims at strengthening the urban local self- governments.
TYPES OF MUNICIPALITIES: According to this Act there are three types of municipalities in every state: i. NAGAR PANCHAYAT: This is meant for a transitional area, that is, an area in transition from a rural area to urban area.
ii.
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL: A Municipal Council is meant for a smaller urban area.
iii.
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION: A municipal Corporation is meant for a larger urban area.
COMPOSITION OF MUNICIPALITY: All the members of a municipality shall be elected directly by the people of the municipal area.
For this purpose, each municipal area is divided into territorial constituencies which are known as wards.
The State Legislature provides the manner of election of the Chairperson of a municipality.
It also provides for the representation of the following persons in a municipality.
i.
Persons having special knowledge or experience in municipal administration without the right to vote in the meetings of municipality.
ii.
The members of the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assembly representing constituencies which comprises wholly or partly the municipal area.
iii.
The members of the Rajya Sabha and the State Legislative Council registered as electors within the municipal area.
WARD COMMITTEES: Ward committee consists of one or more wards within the territorial area of a municipality having population of three lakh or more.
The State Legislature makes provision for the composition, constitution and the territorial area of a ward committee and how the seats in a ward committee shall be filled.
RESERVATION OF SEATS: The Act reserves seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every municipality in proportion of their population to the total population in the municipal area.
Further, it reserves not less than one-third of the total number of seats for women.
It also reserves seats in favour of backward classes.
DURATION OF MUNICIPALITIES: The Act provides for a five-year term for every municipality.
However, it can be dissolved before the completion of its term.
Further, the fresh elections to constitute a municipality shall be completed before the expiry of its duration of five years; or in case of dissolution, before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution.
DISQUALIFICATIONS: A person shall be disqualified for being a member of a municipality if he is so disqualified under any law for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned.
However, no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than 25 years of age if he has attained the age of 21 years.
Further, all questions of disqualifications shall be referred to such authority as the State Legislature determines.
STATE ELECTION COMMISSION: The superintendence, direction and the preparation of electoral rolls and the conduct of elections of the municipalities shall be vested in the State Election Commission.
The State Legislature makes all provisions relating to municipality election.
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF MUNICIPALITIES: The State Legislature empowers the municipalities to function as institutions of self-government.
Accordingly, municipalities are empowered to prepare and implement plans for economic development and social justice.
FINANCES: The State Legislature authorises a municipality to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees.
It provides grant-in-aid to the municipality from the Consolidated Fund of the State.
It also provides for constitution of funds for crediting all money of the municipality.
FINANCE COMMISSION: The Finance Commission shall review the financial position of municipalities and make following recommendation to the Governor: i.
The principles which should govern: a) the distribution between the state and municipalities, the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied by the state.
b) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to the municipalities.
ii) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the municipalities.
iii) Any other matter referred to it by the Governor in the interest of sound finance of municipalities The Governor shall place the recommendations of the Finance Commission along with the action taken report before the State Legislature.
AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS: The State Legislature makes provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by municipalities and the auditing of such accounts : THE INDIAN JUDICIAL SYSTEM: THE SUPREME COURT Indian constitution has established an integrated judicial system with the Supreme Court at the top and High Courts below it.
At the state level, under a High Court, there is a hierarchy of subordinate courts, that is, District Courts and other Lower Courts.
This single system of courts enforces both Central Laws and State Laws.
The Supreme Court of India was inaugurated on 28th January 1950.
Article 124 to 147 in Part-V of the constitution deal with the Supreme Court.
APPOINTMENT OF THE SUPREME COURT JUDGES: The Chief Justice is appointed by the President.
It is the practice to appoint the senior most judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of Supreme Court.
The judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice.
QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGES: A person to be appointed as a judge of the Supreme Court should have the following qualifications: i.
He should be citizen of India.
ii.
(a) He should have been a judge of a High Court (or High Courts in succession) for five years.
or (b) He should have been an advocate of a High Court (or High Courts in succession) for ten years; or (c) He should be a distinguished jurist in the opinion of the President.
OATH 'or' AFFIRMATION: A judge of the Supreme Court, before assuming his office, has to take an oath before the President, or some person appointed by him for this purpose.
In his oath, he swears: i.
To bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution of India; ii.
To uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India; iii.
To duly and faithfully and to the best of his ability, knowledge and judgement perform the duties of the office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will; and iv.
To uphold the constitution and the laws.
TENURE OF JUDGES: The constitution has not fixed the tenure of a judge of the Supreme Court.
However, it makes the following three provisions in this regard: i.
He holds the office until he attains the age of 65 years.
ii.
He can resign his office by writing to the President.
iii.
He can be removed from his office by the President on recommendation of the Parliament.
REMOVAL OF JUDGES: A judge of the Supreme Court can be removed from his office by an order of the President.
The President can issue the removal order only after an address by Parliament has been presented to him in the same session for such removal.
The address must be supported by a special majority of each house of Parliament (i.e., a majority of the total membership of that House and a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting).
The grounds of removal may be proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
The Judges Enquiry Act, 1968, regulates the procedure relating to the removal of a judge of the Supreme Court by the process of impeachment.
No judge has been impeached so far.
SALARIES & ALLOWANCES OF THE JUDGES: The salaries, allowances, privileges, leave and pension of the judges of the Supreme Court are determined from time to time by the Parliament.
These cannot be changed to their disadvantage after their appointment except during a financial emergency.
They are also paid sumptuary allowance and provided with free accommodation and other facilities like medical, car, telephone, etc.
The retired Chief Justice and judges are entitled to 50% of their last drawn salary as monthly pension.
ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE: The President can appoint a judge of the Supreme Court as an acting Chief Justice of India when: i.
The office of the Chief Justice of India is vacant; 'or' ii.
The Chief Justice of India is temporarily absent; 'or' iii.
The Chief Justice of India is unable to perform the duties of his office.
SEAT OF THE SUPREME COURT: The constitution declares Delhi as the seat of the Supreme Court.
But, it also authorises the Chief Justice of India to appoint other place as seat of the Supreme Court.
He can take decision in this regard only with the approval of the President.
PROCEDURE OF SUPREME COURT: With the approval of the President, the Supreme Court can make rules for regulating the practice and procedure of the court.
The constitutional cases or references made by the President under Article 143 are decided by a bench consisting of at least five judges.
All other cases are usually decided by a bench consisting of not less than three judges.
INDEPENDENCE OF SUPREME COURT: The Supreme Court has been assigned a significant role in our democratic political system.
It is a federal court, the highest court of appeal, the guarantor of the fundamental rights of the citizens and guardian of the constitution.
Therefore, its independence becomes essential for the effective discharge of its duties.
It should be free from the encroachments, pressures and interferences of the Executive and the Legislature.
It should be allowed to do justice without fear or favour.
The constitution has made the following provisions to ensure the independent and impartial functioning of the Supreme Court: i. MODE OF APPOINTMENT: The judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and High Courts.
This provision curtails the absolute discretion of the Executive.
The judicial appointments are not based on any political or practical consideration.
ii.
SECURITY OF TENURE: The judges of the Supreme Court are provided with the security of tenure.
They can be removed from office only in the manner and on the grounds mentioned in the constitution.
This means that they do not hold their office during the pleasure of the President, though they are appointed by him.
No judge of the Supreme Court has been removed so far.
iii.
FIXED SERVICE CONDITIONS: The salaries, allowances, privileges, leave and pension of the judges of the Supreme Court are determined from time to time by the Parliament.
These cannot be changed to their disadvantage after their appointment except during a Financial Emergency.
Thus, the conditions of service of the judges of the Supreme Court remain same during their term of office.
iv.
EXPENSES CHARGED ON CONSOLIDATED FUND: The salaries, allowances and pensions of the judges and the staff as well as all the administrative expenses of the Supreme Court are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
Thus, they are non-votable by the Parliament (though they can be discussed by it) V. CONDUCT OF JUDGES CAN NOT BE DISCUSSED: The constitution prohibits any discussion in Parliament or in a State Legislature with respect to the conduct of the judges of the Supreme Court in the discharge of their duties, except when an impeachment motion is under consideration of the Parliament.
vi.
BAN ON PRACTICE AFTER RETIREMENT: The retired judges of the Supreme Court are prohibited from pleading or acting in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.
This ensures that they do not favour anyone in the hope of future favour.
vii.
POWER TO PUNISH FOR ITS CONTEMPT: The Supreme Court can punish any person for its contempt.
Thus, its actions and decisions cannot be criticised and opposed by anybody.
This power is vested in the Supreme Court to maintain its authority, dignity and honor.
viii.
FREEDOM TO APPOINT ITS STAFF: The Chief Justice of India can appoint officers and servants of the Supreme Court without any interference from the Executive.
He can also prescribe their conditions of service.
ix.
ITS JURISDICTION CANNOT BE CURTAILED: The constitution has guaranteed various kinds of jurisdiction to the Supreme Court.
However, the Parliament can extend the same.
But the Parliament is not authorised to curtail the jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court.
x.
SEPARATION FROM EXECUTIVE: The constitution directs the state to take steps to separate the Judiciary from the Executive in the public services.
This means that the Executive authorities should not possess the judicial powers.
Consequently, upon its implementation, the role of the executive authorities in the judicial administration came to an end.
JURISDICTION & POWERS OF SUPREME COURT: The constitution has conferred various kinds of jurisdiction and vast powers on the Supreme Court.
It is not only a federal court but also a final court.
It is also the final interpreter and guardian of the constitution and guarantor of the fundamental rights of the citizens.
Further, it has advisory and supervisory powers.
The Supreme Court of India has more powers than any other Supreme Court of the world.
The jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court are: 1.
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: As a federal court, the Supreme Court decides the disputes between different units of the Indian Federation like a) the Centre and one 'or' more states; 'or' b) the Centre and any state or states on one side and one or more states on the other; or c) between two or more states.
In such federal disputes, the Supreme Court has exclusive original jurisdiction.
Exclusive means, no other court can decide such disputes and original means, the power to hear such disputes in the first instance, not by ways of appeal.
In the original jurisdiction, following two points should be noted.
a) The dispute must involve a question related to law and the question of political nature are excluded from it.
b) Any suit brought before the Supreme Court by a citizen against the Centre or a state cannot be entertained under this.
2.
WRIT JURISDICTION: The Supreme Court is the guarantor and defender of the fundamental rights of the citizens.
The Supreme Court is empowered to issue writs including Habeas Corpus, Mandamus, Prohibition, Quo-warranto and Certiorari for the enforcement of the fundamental rights of an aggrieved citizen.
In this regard, the Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in the sense that an aggrieved citizen can directly go to the Supreme Court, not necessarily by way of appeal.
The High Courts are also empowered to issue writs for the enforcement of the fundamental rights.
The Supreme Court issues writs only for the enforcement of fundamental rights and not for other purposes but the High Court issues writs not only for the enforcement of the fundamental rights but also for other purposes.
3.
APPELLATE JURISDICTION: The Supreme Court is primarily a court of appeal and hears appeal against the judgements of the lower courts.
It enjoys the following appellate jurisdiction: a) CONSTITUTIONAL MATTERS: In the constitutional cases, an appeal can be made to the Supreme Court against the judgement of a High Court if the High Court certifies that the case requires the interpretation of the constitution.
b) CIVIL MATTERS: In civil cases, one can appeal to the Supreme Court from any judgement of a High Court if the High Court certifies that the case involves a law of general importance and it is to be decided by the Supreme Court.
c) CRIMINAL MATTERS: The Supreme Court hears appeals against the judgement in a criminal proceeding of a High Court if the High Court: i. has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death; 'or' ii.
has taken any case from any subordinate court and convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death; or iii.
certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court.
d) Appeal by Special Leave: It means one can appeal the Supreme Court from any judgement in any matter passed by any court or tribunal in the country except military tribunal and court martial.
It may be related to any matter like constitutional, criminal, income-tax, labour, revenue, advocates, etc.
4.
ADVISORY JURISDICTION 'or' CONSULTATIVE JURISDICTION: Article 143 of our constitution authorises the President to seek the opinion of the Supreme Court in following matters: a) On any question of law or fact of public importance which has arisen or which is likely to arise.
b) On any dispute arising out of any pre-constitution treaty, agreement, sanand or other similar instruments.
In the first case, the Supreme Court may tender or may refuse to tender its opinion but in the second case, the Supreme Court must tender its opinion to the President.
In both the cases, the opinion expressed by the Supreme Court may be followed or may not be followed by the President.
However, it is an authoritative legal opinion on a matter going to be decided.
5.
A COURT OF RECORD: As a Court of Record, the Supreme Court has two powers: i) The judgements, proceedings and acts of the Supreme Court are recorded for perpetual memory and testimony.
These records cannot be questioned when produced before any court.
These are legal references.
ii) It has power to punish for contempt of court, either with simple imprisonment for a term up to six months or with fine up to Rs.
2,000/- or with both.
6.
POWER OF JUDICIAL REVIEW: Judicial review is the power of the Supreme Court to examine the constitutionality of legislative enactment and executive orders of both the Central and State Governments.
On examination, if these are found to be violative of the constitution, these will be declared as illegal, unconstitutional and invalid by the Supreme Court.
Consequently, these cannot be enforced by the Government.
7.
OTHER POWERS: i) The Supreme Court decides the disputes regarding the election of the President and Vice- President.
In this regard, it has the original, exclusive and final authority.
ii) It enquires into the conduct and behaviour of the Chairman and Members of Union Public Service Commission on a reference made by the President.
If it finds them guilty of misbehaviour, it can recommend for their removal to the President.
The advice tendered by the Supreme Court in this regard is binding on the President.
iii) The Supreme Court has power to review its own judgement or order.
Thus, it is not bound by its previous decision and can depart from it in the interest of justice or community welfare.
In brief, the Supreme Court is a Self-Correcting Agency.
iv) It is authorised to withdraw the cases pending before the High Courts and dispose them by itself.
It can also transfer a case or appeal pending before one High Court to another High Court.
v) Its law is binding on all courts in India.
Its order is enforceable throughout the country.
vi) It is the ultimate interpreter of the constitution.
It can give final version of the provisions of the constitution and verbiage used in the constitution.
vii) The Supreme Court has power of judicial superintendence and control over all the courts and tribunals functioning in India.
THE HIGH COURT INTRODUCTION: In the integrated judicial system of India, the High Court operates below the Supreme Court but above the Subordinate Courts.
The High Court occupies the top position in the judicial administration of a state.
Article 214 to 231 in Part-VI of the constitution deal with the organisation, independence, jurisdiction, powers, procedures and so on of the High Courts.
ORGANISATION OF HIGH COURT: Every High Court consists of Chief Justice and other judges.
The President determines the strength of a High Court from time to time depending upon the workload.
Appointment of Judges: The Chief Justice and other judges of a High Court are appointed by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of Supreme Court of India and the Governor of the concerned state.
Qualifications of Judges: A person, to be appointed as a judge of a High Court, should have the following qualifications: i) He should be a citizen of India.
ii) He should have held a judicial office in India for ten years or he should have been an advocate of a High Court (or High Courts in succession) for ten years.
The constitution has not prescribed a minimum age for appointment as a judge of a High Court.
Oath of Judges: Before entering upon the office, a person, who is appointed as a judge, has to make an oath before the Governor of the state or some person appointed by him for this purpose.
In his oath, a judge of a High Court swears: i) to bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution of India; ii) to uphold sovereignty and integrity of India; iii) to duly and faithfully and to the best of his ability, knowledge and judgement perform the duties of the office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will; and iv) to uphold the constitution and the law.
Tenure of Judges: A judge of a High Court holds office until he attains the age of 62 years.
He can resign by writing to the President.
He can be removed from his office by the President on the recommendation of the Parliament.
He vacates his office when he is appointed as a judge of the Supreme Court or when he is transferred to another High Court.
Removal of Judges: A judge of a High Court can be removed from his office by an order of the President.
The President can issue the removal order only after an address by the Parliament has been presented to him for such removal.
The address must be supported by a special majority of each House of the Parliament (i.e., a majority of the total membership of that House and majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting).
The grounds of removal are two: proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
Thus, a judge of a High Court can be removed in the same manner and on the same grounds as a judge of the Supreme Court.
PROCEDURE FOR IMPEACHMENT OF A JUDGE: The Judges Enquiry Act, 1968, regulates the procedure relating to the removal of a judge of a High Court/Supreme Court by the process of impeachment.
A removal motion signed by 100 members (in the Lok Sabha) or 50 members (in the Rajya Sabha) is to be given to the Speaker/Chairman.
The Speaker/Chairman may admit the motion or refuse to admit it.
If it is admitted, then the Speaker/Chairman is to constitute a Three-Member Committee (The Chief Justice/a judge of the Supreme Court, a Chief Justice of High Court and a distinguished jurist) to investigate into the charges.
If the Committee finds the judge to be guilty of misbehaviour or suffering from incapacity, the House can take up the consideration of the motion.
After the motion is passed by each House of Parliament by special majority, an address is presented to the President for removal of the judge.
Finally, the President passes an order removing the judge.
No judge of a High Court/Supreme Court has been impeached so far.
Salaries and Allowances of Judges: The salaries, allowances, privileges, leave and pension of the judges of a High Court are determined from time to time by the Parliament.
These cannot be changed to their disadvantage after their appointment except during a Financial Emergency.
They are also paid sumptuary allowance and provided with free accommodation and other facilities like medical, car, telephone, etc.
The retired Chief Justice and judges are entitled to 50% of their last drawn salary as monthly pension.
Transfer of Judges: The President can transfer a judge from one High Court to another after consulting the Chief Justice of India.
On transfer, he is entitled to receive compensatory allowance in addition to his salary.
Acting Chief Justice: The President can appoint a judge of a High Court as an acting Chief Justice of the High Court when the office of the Chief Justice of the High Court is vacant; or the Chief Justice of the High Court is temporarily absent; or the Chief Justice of the High Court is unable to perform the duties of his office.
Additional Judges: The President can appoint duly qualified persons as additional judges of a High Court for a temporary period not exceeding two years when there is a temporary increase in the business of the High Court; or there are arrears of work in the High Court.
However, the additional judge cannot hold office after 62 years of age.
INDEPENDENCE OF THE HIGH COURT: The independence of a High Court is very essential for the effective discharge of the duties assigned to it.
It should be free from the pressures and interferences of the Executive and the Legislature.
It should be allowed to do justice without fear or favour.
The constitution has made the following provisions to safeguard and ensure the independent and impartial functioning of a High Court: i. Mode of Appointment: The judges of a High Court are appointed by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and the Chief Justice of High Court.
This provision curtails the absolute discretion of the Executive.
ii.
Security of Tenure: The judges of a High Court are provided with the security of tenure.
They can be removed from the office by the President only in the manner and on the grounds mentioned in the constitution.
This means that they do not hold their office during the pleasure of the President, though they are appointed by him.
So far, no judges of a High Court have been removed.
iii.
Fixed Service Conditions: The salaries, allowances, privileges, leave and pension of the judges of a high Court are determined from time to time by the Parliament.
But, they cannot be changed to their disadvantage after their appointment except during a Financial Emergency.
Thus, the conditions of service of the judges of a High Court remain same during their term of office.
iv.
Expenses charged on Consolidated Fund: The salaries, allowances and pension of the judges, the salaries, allowances and pension of the staff as well as the administrative expenses of a High Court are charged on the Consolidated Fund of the state.
Thus, these are non-votable by the State Legislature though these can be discussed by it.
iv.
Conduct of Judges cannot be discussed: The constitution prohibits any discussion in Parliament or in State Legislature with respect to the conduct of the judges except when an impeachment motion is under consideration.
vi.
Ban on Practice after Retirement: The retired permanent judges of a High Court are prohibited from pleading or acting in any court or before any authority in India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.
This ensures that they do not favour anyone in the hope of future favour.
vii.
Power to punish for its contempt: A High Court can punish any person for its contempt.
Thus, its actions and decisions cannot be criticised and opposed by anybody.
This power is vested in a High Court to maintain its authority, dignity and honor.
viii.
Freedom to Appoint its Staff: The Chief Justice of a High Court can appoint officers and servants of the High Court without any interference from the Executive.
He also prescribes their conditions of service.
ix.
Separation from Executive: The constitution directs the state to take steps to separate the Judiciary from the Executive in public services.
This means that the Executive authorities should not possess the judicial powers.
Consequent upon its implementation, the role of executive authorities in judicial administration come to an end.
JURISDICTION & POWERS OF HIGH COURT: The High Court enjoys the following jurisdiction and powers: i.
Original Jurisdiction: It means the power of a High Court to hear disputes in the first instance, not by way of appeal.
It extends to the following:  Matters of will, marriage, divorce, company laws and contempt of court.
 Disputes relating to the election of Members of Parliament and State Legislature.
 Enforcement of Fundamental Rights of citizens.
 Cases ordered to be transferred from a subordinate court involving the interpretation of the constitution to its own file.
ii.
Writ Jurisdiction: Article 226 of the constitution empowers a High Court to issue writs including Habeas Corpus, Mandamus, Certiorari, Prohibition and Quo-warranto for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights of the citizens and for other purpose like enforcement of an ordinary legal right.
When the fundamental rights of a citizen are violated, the aggrieved party has the option of moving either to the High Court or to the Supreme Court directly.
However, the writ jurisdiction of the High Court is wider than that of the Supreme Court.
This is because, the Supreme Court can issue writs only for the enforcement of fundamental rights and not for any other purpose.
iii.
Appellate Jurisdiction: A High Court is primarily a court of appeal.
It has appeals against the judgements of subordinate courts functioning in its territorial jurisdiction.
It has appellate jurisdiction in both civil and criminal matters.
Hence, the appellate jurisdiction of a High Court is wider than its original jurisdiction.
iv.
Supervisory Jurisdiction: A High Court has the power of superintendence over all courts and tribunals functioning in its territorial jurisdiction (except military courts).
Thus, it may: a) call for returns from them; b) make and issue, general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of them; c) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts are to be kept by them; and d) settle the fees payable to the sheriff, clerks, officers and legal practitioners.
V. Control over Subordinate Courts: High Court is consulted by the Governor in the matters of posting, promotion, grant of leave, transfers and discipline of the members of the judicial service of the state (other than District Judges).
It can withdraw a case pending in a subordinate court if it involves a question of law that requires the interpretation of the constitution.
It can either dispose of the case itself or determine the question of law and return the case to the subordinate court with its judgement.
Its law is binding on all subordinate courts functioning within its territorial jurisdiction.
vi.
A Court of Record: As a court of record, a High Court has two powers: The judgements, proceedings and acts of the High Courts are recorded for perpetual memory and testimony.
These records cannot be questioned when produced before any subordinate court.
These are recognised as legal references.
It has power to punish for contempt of court, either with simple imprisonment or with fine or with both.
vii.
Power of Judicial Review: Judicial review is the power of a High Court to examine the constitutionality of legislative enactments and executive orders of both the Central and State Govts.
On examination, if they are found to be violative of the constitution, they can be declared as illegal, unconstitutional and invalid by the High Court.
The constitutional validity of a legislative enactment or an executive order can be challenged in a High Court if it infringes the fundamental rights 'or' if it is outside the competence of the authority which has framed it, 'or' it is opposed to the constitutional provisions.
DISCLAIMER: The courseware material prepared may contain some text, figures and diagrams taken from google images and other readily available web sources.
The contents are prepared for the use of students in Silicon Institute of Technology as additional reference material, and not for any commercial purpose.
FOREWORD This is the second iteration of preparing our own courseware material, after successful completion of a similar task undertaken a few years ago.
These contents have been carefully prepared and should serve as excellent auxiliary material for both instructors and students.
The Special Academic Group, Autonomy (SAGA) was formed for the sole purpose of preparing courseware contents primarily in the first-year theory subjects; a few second-year subjects were also included.
The subjects for the first year were - Basic Electrical Engineering, Basic Electronics Engineering, Computer Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms, Engineering Mathematics I and II, Engineering Physics, Engineering Chemistry, Constitution of India, Environmental Science and Engineering and Communicative and Technical English.
For the second year, the subjects for which courseware material was prepared were Analog Electronic Circuits, Digital Systems Design, Circuit Theory and Measurements and Instruments.
Faculty members from all the departments contributed to the task.
They were, in no particular order, Nalini Singh, Bimal Meher, Saumyaranjan Dash, Mukti Routray, Susmita Biswal, Manasa Dash, Bipin Tripathy, Sibasankar Nayak, Janmejay Senapati, Subrat Sahu, Pradeep Moharana, Rupambika Pattanaik, Dhananjay Tripathy, Jagadish Patra, Sachin Das, Deepak Ranjan Nayak, Amulya Roul, Bodhisattva Dash, Sanghamitra Das, Gyana Ranjan Biswal, Nibedita Swain and Rajan Mishra.
The entire group worked diligently to successfully complete the task which included a peer review of the material.
I take this opportunity to thank all the members of the SAGA group for a job well done.
I sincerely hope that this courseware material comes in handy and is utilized to the fullest extent.
These are readily available additional resources prepared in accordance with the Silicon autonomy syllabus, to complement textbooks and classroom lectures.
If there are any errors, I would be grateful if they are brought to my notice so that we can correct them in subsequent versions.
Dr. Jaideep Talukdar, Principal Silicon Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar December 2020 : WATER TREATMENT Hardness: Hardness of water is a characteristic property by which water "'prevents lathering of soap".
Causes: The hardness of water is due to presence of certain salts (mainly bicarbonates, sulphates and Chlorides) of Ca, Mg and few other heavy metal salts dissolved in water.
A sample of hard water when treated with soap (sodium or potassium salt of higher fatty acid like oleic, palmitic or stearic) do not produce lather with soap, but on the other hand forms a white scum or precipitate.
The precipitate is formed due to insoluble soaps of Ca and Mg.
Reactions:- 2C17H35COONa + CaCl2 → Ca(C17H35COO)2 + NaCl Sodium Stearate (Sodium soap) hardness Calcium Stearate (Insoluble) 2 C17H35COONa + MgSO4 → (C17H35COO)2Mg + Na2SO4 Magnesium Stearate (Insoluble) Thus, the water which does not produce lather with soap solution readily is called Hard water the one which lathers easily on shaking with soap solution is called soft water.
Causes of Hardness: Hardness of water is due to the presence of Bicarbonates, Chlorides, Sulphates and Nitrates of Calcium and Magnesium.
These soluble salts get mixed with natural water due to the following reasons: 1.
When natural water containing CO2 flows over the rocks of the limestone (CaCO3) and Dolomite (CaCO3 & MgCO3), they get converted into soluble bicarbonates.
Thus, water gets hardness.
CaCO3 + H2O + CO2 → Ca (HCO3)2 Insoluble Soluble 2.
When natural water flows over the rocks containing chlorides and sulphates and Nitrates of Calcium and magnesium, these salts dissolve in water.
Thus water gets hardness.
Disadvantages of Hard Water: 1.
In Domestic use: > Washing: Hard water, when used for washing purposes, does not producing lather freely with soap.
As a result cleaning quality of soap is decreased and a lot of it is wasted.
> Bathing: Hard water does not lather freely with soap solution, but produces sticky scum on the bathtub and body.
Thus, the cleaning quality of soap is depressed and a lot of it is wasted.
> Cooking: The boiling point of water is increased because of presence of salts.
Hence more fuel and time are required for cooking.
> Drinking: Hard water causes bad effects on our digestive system.
Moreover, the possibility of forming calcium oxalate crystals in urinary tracks is increased.
2.
Industrial Use: > Textile Industry: Hard water causes wastage of soap.
Precipitates of calcium and magnesium soaps adhere to the fabrics and cause problem.
> Sugar Industry: The water which containing sulphates, nitrates, alkali carbonates are used in sugar refining, cause difficulties in the crystallization of sugar.
> Dyeing Industry: The dissolved salts in hard water may reacts with costly dyes forming precipitates.
> Paper Industry: Calcium, magnesium, Iron salts in water may affect the quality of paper.
> Pharmaceutical Industry: Hard water may cause some undesirable products while preparation of pharmaceutical products.
3.
Steam generation in Boilers: > For steam generation, boilers are almost invariably employed.
If the hard water is fed directly to the boilers, there arise many troubles such as: Scales & sludges formation, Corrosion, Priming & Foaming and Caustic embrittlement.
TYPES OF HARDNESS Hardness of water is mainly two types: 1.
Temporary Hardness 2.
Permanent Hardness 1.
Temporary Hardness: Temporary Hardness mainly caused by the presence of dissolved bicarbonates of Calcium, Magnesium (Ca (HCO3)2, Mg (HCO3)2).
Temporary Hardness can be largely removed by boiling of water.
Ca (HCO3)2 → CaCO3 + H2O + CO2 Calcium bicarbonate Mg (HCO3)2 → Mg (OH)2 + 2CO2 Magnesium bicarbonate 2.
Permanent Hardness: It is due to the presence of dissolved Chlorides, Nitrates and Sulphates of Calcium, Magnesium, Iron and other metals.
Permanent hardness responsible salts are CaCl2,, MgCl2, CaSO4, MgSO4, FeSO4, Al2(SO4)3.
Permanent Hardness cannot be removed by boiling but it can be removed by the use of chemical agents.
EXPRESSION AND UNITS OF HARDNESS The expression of hardness producing salts usually expressed in terms of an equivalent amount of CaCO3.
Calcium Carbonate is chosen as a standard because: i.
Its molecular weight (100) and equivalent weight (50) is a whole number, so the calculations in water analysis can be simplified.
ii.
It is the most insoluble salt that can be precipitated in water treatment.
The conversion of the hardness causing salts into CaCO3 equivalents can be achieved by using the following formula: Degree of Hardness = The weight of hardness causing salts x 100 (Molecular weight of CaCO3) Units of Hardness: 1.
Parts per Million (ppm): The number of parts of calcium carbonate equivalent hardness presents in 106 parts of water.
1ppm = 1 part of CaCO3 eq hardness in 106 parts of water.
2.
Milligrams per litre (mg/1): The number of milligrams of calcium carbonate equivalent hardness presents in litre of water.
1 mg/L = 1 mg of CaCO3 eq hardness in 1 litre of water.
But one litre of water weights =1 kg =1000g = 1000 x 1000 mg = 106 mg = 1 ppm.
3.
Clark's degree (°Cl): The number of parts of calcium carbonate equivalent hardness presents in 70,000 or (7x104) parts of water.
1° Clarke = 1 part of CaCO3 eq hardness per 70,000 parts of water.
4.
Degree French (°Fr): The number of parts of calcium carbonate equivalent hardness presents in 105 parts of water.
1° Fr = 1 part of CaCO3 hardness eq per 105 parts of water.
5.
Milli-equivalent per liter (meq/L):- is the number of milli-equivalents of hardness present per liter.
1meq/L= 1meq of CaCO3 per liter of water = 10-3x 50 g of CaCO3 eq.
per liter = 50 mg of CaCO3 eq.
per liter = 50 mg/L of CaCO3 eq.
= 50ppm.
Relationship between various units of hardness: 1 ppm = 1 mg/L = 0.1° Fr= 0.07° Cl = 0.02 meq/ L 1 mg/L = 1 ppm = 0.1° Fr = 0.07° Cl 1 ° Cl = 1.433° Fr = 14.3 ppm = 14.3 mg/L 1 ° Fr = 10 ppm = 10 mg/L = 0.7° Cl calculation of equivalents of CaCO3: Problem-1: A sample of water is found to contains following dissolving salts in milligrams per litre Mg(HCO3)2 = 73, CaCl2 = 111, Ca(HCO3)2 = 81, MgSO4 = 40 and MgCl2 = 95.
Calculate temporary and permanent hardness and total hardness.
Salt/ion Molar mass Chemical Equivalent or Equivalent Weight Multiplication factor for converting into equivalents of CaCO3 Ca(HCO3)2 162 81 100/162 Mg(HCO3)2 146 73 100/146 CaSO4 136 68 100/136 CaCl2 111 55.5 100/111 MgSO4 120 60 100/120 MgCl2 95 47.5 100/95 CaCO3 100 50 100/100 MgCO3 84 42 100/84 CO2 44 22 100/44 Ca(NO3)2 164 82 100/164 Mg(NO3)2 148 74 100/148 HCO3- 61 61 100/122 OH- 17 17 100/34 CO2 60 30 100/60 NaAlO2 82 82 100/164 Al2(SO4)3 342 57 100/114 FeSO4.7H2O 278 139 100/278 H+ 1 1 100/2 HCl 36.5 1 100/73 = 50 + 50 = 100mgs/Lit.
Permanent hardness = CaCl2+ MgSO4 + MgCl2 = 100 + 33.3 + 100 = 233.3mgs/Lit.
Total hardness = Temporary hardness + Permanent hardness = 100 + 233.3 = 333.3mgs/Lit.
POTABLE WATER AND ITS SPECIFICATIONS Water free from contaminants or water that is safe for human consumption is called potable water.
The following are the specifications of water drinking purpose.
1.
The water should be clear (colorless), odorless and pleasant taste.
2.
The optimum hardness of water must be 125ppm.
3.
The pH of potable water should be 7.0 to 8.5.
4.
The recommended maximum concentration of total dissolved solids (TDS) in potable water must not exceed 500 ppm.
5.
The turbidity in drinking water should not exceed 25 ppm.
6.
The water must be free from heavy metals like Lead, Arsenic, Chromium and Manganese.
7.
The water must be free from pathogenic bacteria 8.
The water must be free from dissolved gases like H2S, CO2 and NH3.
BOILER TROUBLES A boiler is a closed vessel in which water under pressure is transformed into steam by the application of heat.
The steam so generated is used in industries and generation of power.
In modern pressure boilers and laboratories, the water required is used pure than the distilled water.
A boiler feed water should correspond with the following composition: > Its hardness should be below 0.2ppm.
> Its caustic alkalinity (due to OH-) should lie between 0.15ppm to 0.45ppm.
> Its soda alkalinity (due to Na2CO3) should lie in between 0.45ppm to 1ppm.
> It's should be free from dissolved gases like O2, CO2, in order to prevent boiler corrosion.
Solution: Name of the hardness causing salts Amount of the hardness causing salts(mg/Lit) Molecular weight of hardness causing salts Amounts equivalent to CaCO3 (mg/Lit) Mg(HCO3)2 73 146 73x100/146 = 50 CaCl2 111 111 111x100/111 = 100 Ca(HCO3)2 81 162 81x100/162 = 50 MgSO4 40 120 40x100/120 = 33.3 MgCl2 95 95 95x100/95 = 100 Temporary hardness = Mg(HCO3)2 + Ca(HCO3)2 Excess of impurities in the boiler feed water generally cause the following problems: 1.
Sludge's and Scale formation 2.
Caustic embrittlement Boilers are employed for the steam generation in power plants, where water as continuously heated to produce steam.
As more and more water is removed from water in the form of steam, the boiler water gets concentrated with dissolved salts progressively reaches the saturation point.
At this point the dissolved salts are precipitated out and slowly settle on the inner walls of the boiler plate.
The precipitation takes place in two ways.
SLUDGES Sludge is a soft, loosy and slimy precipitate formed within the boiler.
It is formed at comparatively colder portions of the boiler and collects in the area where flow rate is slow.
Ex: MgCO3, MgCl2, CaCl2, MgSO4.
Reasons for formation of sludges: The dissolved salts whose solubility is more in hot water and less in cold water produce sludges.
Disadvantages of sludges: 1.
Sludges are bad conductors of heat and results in the wastage of heat and fuel.
2.
Excessive sludge formation leads to the settling of sludge in slow circulation areas such as pipe connections, plug openings, gauge-glass connections leading to the choking of the pipes.
Prevention of sludge formation: a.
By using soft water which is free from dissolved salts like MgCO3, MgCl2, CaCl2 and MgSO4 can prevent sludge formation.
b.
By blow down operation carried out frequently can prevent sludge formation.
SCALES Scales are hard, adhering precipitates formed on the inner walls of the boilers.
Scales are stick very firmly on to the inner walls of the boiler.
It is removed with chisel and hammer.
Scales are formed by decomposition of calcium bicarbonate in low pressure boilers.
It is most due to the presence of CaSO4, MgCl2, Silica, Ca(HCO)2.
Reasons for formation of scales: a. Decomposition of calcium bicarbonate: The calcium bicarbonate at high temperature decomposes to calcium carbonate which is insoluble salt, forms scale in low pressure boilers.
Ca(HCO3)2 →CaCO3 + H2O + CO2 b. Hydrolysis of Magnesium salts: Magnesium salts gets hydrolyzed at high temperature forming Mg(OH)2 precipitation which forms salt type scale.
MgCl2 + H2O → Mg(OH)2 + 2HCl c. Decomposition of calcium sulphate: The solubility of CaSO4 in water decreases with the increase in temperature and forms precipitation on the surface of the boiler further which forms hard scale.
This type of scales is formed in high-pressure boilers.
d. Presence of silica: SiO2 present even in small quantities, deposits as Calcium silicates (CaSiO3) or Magnesium silicates (MgSiO3).
The deposits form hard scale and are very difficult to remove.
Disadvantages of Scales: Wastage of heat and fuels: Scales poor thermal conductivity so that rate of heat transformation is Thickness (mm)) 0.325 0.625 1.25 2.5 12 Wastage of fuel 10% 15% 50% 80% 150% 1.
Lowering of boiler safety is due to overheating of the boiler material becomes softer and weaker, which causes distortion of boiler.
2.
Decrease in efficiency of the boiler due to scales deposited in the values and condensers of the boiler cause choking.
3.
Danger of explosion which happens the formation of the scales, the boiler plate faces higher temperature outside and lesser temperature inside due to uneven expansion.
The water comes suddenly contact with overheated portion and larger amount steam is formed immediately, this results in development of sudden high pressure which may cause explosion of the boiler.
Prevention of scales: a.
If the scale formation is soft it can be removed by a scrapper, wire brush.
b.
By giving thermal shocks, by sudden heating and sudden cooling which makes scale brittle and removed by scrubbing with wire brush.
c. If scale is very hard that is formed by CaCO3 can be removed by washing with 5-10% HCl and CaSO4 can be removed with EDTA solution.
Distinguish between sludge and scale.
Sludge Scale They are soft, loose and slimy precipitate.
They form hard deposits.
They form non-adherent deposits and can be easily removed.
They stick firmly to the inner surface of the boiler and are very difficult to remove.
They are formed by substances like CaCl2, MgCl2, MgSO4, MgCO3, etc.
They are formed by substances like CaSO4, Mg(OH)2, etc.
They are formed at comparatively colder portions of the boiler.
They are formed at heated portions of the boiler.
They decrease efficiency of boiler but are less dangerous.
They decrease efficiency of boiler and chances of explosion are also there.
They can be removed by blow down operation.
They can't be removed by blow down operation.
CAUSTIC EMBRITTLEMENT The formation of brittle and in crystalline cracks in the boiler shell is called caustic embrittlement.
The main reason for this is the presence of alkali-metal carbonates and bicarbonates in feed water.
In lime-soda process, it is likely that, some residual Na2CO3 is still present in the softened water.
This Na2CO3 decomposes to give NaOH and CO2, due to which the boiler water becomes "Caustic Soda".
Na2CO3+ H2O → 2NaOH + CO2 The H2O evaporates, the concentration of NaOH increase progressively creating a concentration cell as given below thus dissolving the iron of the boiler as sodium ferrate (Na2FeO2).
This causes embrittlement of boiler parts such as bends, joints, reverts etc, due to which the boiler gets fail.
The iron at plane surfaces surrounded by dilute NaOH becomes cathodic while the iron at bends and joints surrounded by highly concentrated NaOH becomes anodic which consequently decayed or corroded.
Caustic embrittlement can be prevented: a.
By maintaining the pH value of water and neutralization of alkali.
b.
By using Sodium Phosphate as softening reagents, in the external treatment of boilers.
c. Caustic embrittlement can also be prevented by adding Tannin or Lignin or Sodium sulphate which prevents the infiltration of caustic-soda solution blocking the hair-cracks.
d. By adding Na2SO4 to boiler water.
Na2SO4 is added to boiler water so that the ratio Na2SO4Concentration and NaOH concentration is kept as 1:1:,2:1,3:1 in boilers working (-)Anode: 'Fe' at bents Conc.NaOH Dil.NaOH 'Fe' at plane Surface: Cathode (+) respectively at pressure up to 10,20 and 30 atmosphere.
NaOH Concentration is kept as 1:1:2:1 and 3:1 in boilers working respectively at pressures up to 10, 20 and 30 atmospheres.
Disadvantages of caustic embrittlement: The cracking or weakening of the boiler metal causes failure of the boiler.
INTERNAL TREATMENT OF WATER Suitable chemicals are added to the boiler water either to precipitate or to convert the scale into compounds is called internal treatment of the boiler feed water.
Internal treatment can be done following types.
1.
Calgon conditioning: Involves in adding calgon to boiler water.
It prevents the scale and sludge formation by forming soluble complex compound with CaSO4.
Calgon = Sodium hexa meta phosphate = Na2 [Na4 (PO3)6] Na2 [Na4 (PO3)6] →2Na+ + [Na4P6O18]-2 2CaSO4 + [Na4P6O18] -2 → [Ca2 P6O18]-2 + 2Na2SO4 2.
Phosphate conditioning: The addition of sodium phosphate in hard water reacts with the hardness causing agents and gives calcium and magnesium phosphates which are soft and non-adhere and can be removed easily by blow-down operation.
3CaCl2 + 2 Na3PO4 → Ca3(PO4)2 + 6NaCl 3MgSO4 + 2 Na3PO4 → Mg3(PO4)2 + 3Na2SO4 Generally three types of Phosphates are employed.
i. Tri sodium Phosphate (Na3PO4): is too alkaline used for treat to too acidic water.
ii.
Di sodium Phosphate (Na2 HPO4): is weakly alkaline used for treat to weakly acidic water.
iii.
Sodium dihydrogen Phosphate (Na H2PO4): is too acidic used for treat to too alkaline water.
3.
Colloidal conditioning: The addition of organic substances such as Kerosene, tannin, Gel.
These substances gets coated over the scale forming precipitates and gives a loose and non- sticky precipitates which can be removed by using blow-down operation.
Priming: When a boiler is steaming (i.e., producing steam) rapidly, some particles of the liquid water are carried along with the steam.
This process of 'wet steam' formation is known as 'Priming'.
Causes: Priming is caused by: 1.
The presence of large amount of dissolved salts 2.
High steam velocities 3.
Sudden boiling 4.
Improper boiler design 5.
Sudden increase in steam production rate.
Prevention: 1.
By fitting mechanical purifiers 2.
Avoiding rapid change in steam rate 3.
Maintaining low water levels in boilers 4.
Effective softening and filtration of boiler feed water 5.
Blow down of the boiler.
Foaming: The phenomenon of formation of persistent foam or bubbles on the surface of water inside the boiler, which do not break easily.
Causes: 1.
Pure water has very little foaming whereas the water containing dissolved impurities and suspended matter has a greater tendency to produce foam.
2.
The presence of large quantity of suspended impurities and oils lowers the surface tension producing foam.
Prevention: 1.
Adding antifoaming chemicals like castor oil.
2.
Besides castor oil, Gallic acid and tannic acids, corn oil, cotton seed oil, sperm oil, bees wax, etc., are also used as antifoaming agents.
3.
Blow down operation of the boiler can prevent foaming.
4.
Removing oil form boiler water by adding compounds like sodium aluminate.
Disadvantages of Priming and Foaming: Priming and Foaming usually occur together.
They are objectionable because: - 1.
The dissolved salts in boiler water are carried by the wet steam to super heater and turbine blades where they get deposited and reduce the efficiency.
2.
The dissolved salts enter the parts of other machinery where steam is used thereby decreasing the life of machinery.
3.
The actual height of the water column cannot be judged thereby making the maintenance of boiler pressure becomes difficult.
Boiler corrosion: The decay of boiler material by chemical or electrochemical attack by its environment is known as "Boiler corrosion".
The main reasons for boiler corrosion are:- Dissolved Oxygen: water contains usually about 8ml of dissolved oxygen per liter at room temperature.
Disadvantages of dissolved oxygen: In presence of prevailing high temperature, the dissolved Oxygen attacks boiler material as follows: 2Fe+ 2H2O+ O2 → 2Fe(OH)2 4Fe(OH)2+ O2 →2[Fe2O3.2H2O] (rust) Removal of dissolved Oxygen: 1) By adding calculated quantity of Sodium sulphite (Na2SO3) or hydrazine(N2H4) or sodium sulphide (Na2S).
2Na2SO3+ O2 --------------► 2 Na2SO4 N2H4+ O2 ------------ N2+ 2H2O Na2S + 2O2 ------------► Na2SO4 Hydrazine is an ideal internal treatment chemical for the removal of dissolved oxygen.
Azamina 8001-RD (a polyvalent organic compound) has been employed for degassing water in minimum time.
2) By Mechanical de-aeration i.e., spraying water through a perforated plate fitted in degasification tower, heated from sides and connected to a vacuum pump as shown in the figure.
High temperature, low pressure and large exposed surface (provided by perforated plates) reduce the dissolved oxygen in water.
3) Dissolved Carbon dioxide: has a slow corrosive effect on the materials of boiler plate.
Under the high temperature and pressure the bicarbonates decompose to produce CO2.
Mg(HCO3)2-------► MgCO3 + H2O + CO2 Disadvantages of CO2: It has slow corrosive effect on boiler plates by producing the carbonic acid.
CO2 + H2O----------- ► H2CO3 Removal of CO2: By adding calculated amount of ammonia.
2NH4OH + CO2 → (NH4)2CO3 + H2O By mechanical deaeration process along with oxygen.
Acids from dissolved salts: water containing dissolved Mg salts liberate acids on hydrolysis.
Ex: MgCl2 + 2H2O → Mg(OH)2 + 2HCl Disadvantages of acids: The acids react with the iron of boiler plate in a chain reaction producing HCl again and again.
Fe+2HCl → FeCl2 + H2 FeCl2+2H2O →Fe(OH)2 +2HCl Presence of even a small amount of MgCl2 will have corrosion of iron to a large extent.
Prevention of acid corrosion: 1) By softening of boiler water to remove MgCl2 from the water.
2) By frequent blow down operation.
3) Addition of inhibitors to form a thin film on the surface of the boiler protecting the metal from attack.
Sodium silicates, sodium phosphates and sodium chromate acts as good corrosion inhibitors.
External Removal Process 1) Ion exchange process is also known as demineralization process.
Ion- Exchange resins are insoluble.
Cross linked long chain organic polymers with a micro porous structure, and the "functional Groups" attached to the chains are responsible for the ion-exchanging properties.
Resins with acidic functional group are capable of exchanging H+ ions with other cations.
Resins with basic functional groups are capable of exchanging OH-ions with other anions.
Resins are classified as: i. Cation Exchange Resins ii.
Anion Exchange Resins.
i. Cation Exchange Resins: Cation exchange resins are styrene divinyl benzene co-polymers, which on sulphonation (or) carboxylation, which contains -COOH, -SO3H functional groups which responsible for exchanging their hydrogen ions with cations in water.
2RH + Ca(HCO)2 → R2Ca + H2CO3 , 2RH + Mg(HCO)2 →R2Mg + H2CO3 , 2RH + CaCl2 → R2Ca + 2HCl ii.
Anion Exchange Resins: Anion exchange resins are Phenol formaldehyde (or) amine formaldehyde copolymers, which contains amino or basic functional groups which responsible for exchanging their OH- ions with anions in water.
ROH + HCl → RCl + H2O 2ROH + H2SO4 → R2SO4 + 2H2O ROH + H2CO3 →RHCO3 + H2O(ROH = anion exchange resin) In ion-exchange process, hard water is allowed to pass through cation exchange resins, which remove Ca+2 and Mg+2 ions and exchange equivalent amount of H+ ions.
Anions exchange resins remove bicarbonates, chlorides and sulphates from water exchange equivalent amount of OH- ions.
Thus by passing hard water through cation hardness is observed by the following reactions.
H+ and OH-ions, thus released in water from respective cation and anion exchange columns, get combined to produce water molecules.
H+ + OH- →H2O The water coming out from the exchanger is ion free from anions and cations.
Thus water of zero hardness is obtained.
Regeneration: When cation exchanger losses capacity of producing H+ ions and exchanger losses capacity of producing OH- ions, they are said to be exhausted.
The exhausted cation exchanger is regenerated by passing it through dilute sulphuric acid.
R2Ca + 2HCl → 2RH + CaCl2 , R2Mg + 2H2SO4 →2RH + MgSO4 The exhausted anion exchanger is regenerated by passing a dilute solution of NaOH.
RCl + NaOH → ROH +NaCl RHCO3 + NaOH → ROH + NaHCO3 Merits of Ion-exchange process: > The process can be used to soften highly acidic or alkaline water.
> It produces water of very low hardness (2ppm) > So it is very good for treating water for use in high-pressure boilers.
Demerits of Ion-exchange process: > The equipment is costly and more expensive chemicals are needed.
> If water contains turbidity, the output of the process is reduced.
The turbidity must be below 10ppm; else it has to be removed by coagulation and filtration.
2) Lime-Soda process: In this process, lime [(Ca(OH)2)] and soda [Na2CO3] are the reagents used to precipitate the dissolved salts of Ca +2 and Mg+2 as CaCO3 and Mg(OH)2 which are later on filtered off.
Lime reacts with temporary hardness causing salts, Mg permanent hardness, CO2, acids, bicarbonates and alums.
Lime cannot remove permanent hardness which should be removed by soda.
Precautions to be followed during process: Only calculated amounts of lime and soda must be added.
Excess of lime-soda causes boiler troubles like corrosion and caustic embrittlement.
The chemical reactions of lime and soda are slow and the precipitates CaCO3 and Mg(OH)2 are very fine.
Proper time must be given for the reactions of softening process to complete, because all the reactions of the process are slow.
Cold lime soda process: Calculated amounts of lime and soda are mixed with water at room temperature.
Cold lime soda process provides water containing residual hardness of 50-60 ppm.
The precipitates formed are finely divided which do not settle down and can"t be filtered easily.
So, it is essential to add small amounts of coagulants (like alum, aluminium sulphate, sodium aluminate) which hydrolyse to flocculent, gelatinous precipitate of Al(OH) 3 and entraps the precipitate.
Use of sodium aluminate as Coagulant also helps in the removal of silica as well as oil present in the water.
NaAlO2+ 2H2O → NaOH + Al(OH)3 Al2(SO4)3 + 3Ca(HCO3)2 →2Al(OH)3 |+ 3CaSO4+ 6CO2 Method: Raw water and calculated quantities of chemicals (lime+soda+coagulant) are fed from the top into inner vertical circular chamber fitted with a vertical rotating shaft carrying a number of paddles.
As the raw water and chemicals flow down, there is vigorous stirring and continuous mixing whereby softening of water takes place.
The heavy sludge settles down in the outer chamber by the time softened water reaches up.
The softened water then passes through a filtering media (made of wood fibres) to ensure complete removal of sludge.
Filtered soft water finally flows out continuously through the outlet at the top and sludge settling at the bottom of the outer chamber is drawn off occasionally.
Hot Soda Lime Process: It involves treating water with softening chemicals at a temperature of 800-1500 C. Since hot process is operated at a temperature close to the boiling point of the solution, so Hot lime soda process produces water of residual hardness of 15-30ppm.
Process: It contains essentially three parts Raw wate feed intet Super heated steam inlet Reaction tank Conical sedimentation tank Precipitated sludges [CaCO and Mg (OH) ] Precipitated sludge outlet Softened water Coarse sandlayB Gravels layer Fitered softened water outlet a) The reaction proceeds faster, b) Softening capacity of hot process is increased, c) The precipitate and sludge formed settle down rapidly and hence no coagulants are needed, d) Much of the dissolved gases (CO2) are driven out, e) Viscosity of softened water is lower so filtration of water becomes much 1) A reaction tank in which water, chemical and steam are thoroughly mixed.
2) A conical sedimentation vessel in which sludge settle down.
A sand filter which ensures complete removal of sludge from the softened water.
Advantages of Lime-Soda process: 1) It is very economical.
2) The process increases the pH value of treated water thereby corrosion of distribution pipes is reduced.
3) Besides removal of hardness causing salts, minerals, iron and manganese present in water is removed.
4) Due to alkaline nature, amount of pathogenic bacteria in water is considerably reduced.
Disadvantages Of Lime-Soda Process: 1) Skilled supervision is required for efficient and economical softening.
2) Disposal of large amounts of sludge poses a problem.
3) This can remove hardness only up to 15ppm, which is not good for boilers.
Differences between cold and hot lime soda process: - Points to be followed while solving problems in lime soda problems: 1) To convert the hardness of the hardness causing salts in terms of CaCO3 equivalents.
2) If CaCO3 is given as hardness causing salt, it should also be considered as temporary hardness expressed in terms of CaCO3.
3) MgCO3, Mg(HCO3)2, should be converted to CaCO3 equivalents.
4) Some salts like NaCl, KCl, Silica, K2SO4, Fe2O3 neither cause hardness nor react with lime and soda.
Hence they must not be considered for calculation of lime and soda required.
Sl.No.
Cold Lime Soda Process Hot Lime Soda Process 1.
It is done at room temperature.
It is done at elevated temperatures (84- 100 0C).
2.
It is slow process.
It is rapid process.
3.
Use of coagulants is must.
Coagulants are not needed.
4.
Filtration is not easy.
Filtration is easy as viscosity of water becomes low at elevated temperatures.
5.
Softened water has residual hardness around 60 ppm.
Softened water has residual hardness around 15-30 ppm.
6.
Dissolved gases are not removed.
Dissolved gases such as CO2 are removed to some extent.
7.
It has low softening capacity.
It has high softening capacity.
5) The hardness of Al2(SO4)3 must be multiplied by 3 for both lime and soda, HCl hardness must be multiplied by 0.5, Mg(HCO3)2 hardness must be multiplied by 2, NaHCO3, KHCO3, NaAlO2 hardness multiplied by 0.5 and should be subtracted for calculation of amount of lime and soda required respectively.
3) Zeolite Process Zeolite are hydrated sodium alumino siticates Na2O.Al2O3 xSiO2.yH2O.
(x=2-10 and y=2- 6) (inorganic salts).
They work as water softners by replacing the calcium and magnesium ions in water with the sodium ions in zeolite.
Zeolite Natural zeolites Synthetic zeolites 1.
Natural zeolites Non-porous, amoamorphous and durable e.g.
Na2O.
Al2O3.3SiO2.2H2O (Natrolite) CaO.Al2O3.4SiO2.4H2O (Laumonite) 2.
Synthetic zeolites Gel like structures, generally porous Na2CO3, Al2O3 and SiO2 heated together Na2O.Al2O3 xSiO2.yH2O.
(x=2-10 and y=2-6) For softening of water by zeolite process, hard water is percolated at a specified rate through a bed of zeolite.
Zeolite holds sodium ion loosely and can be represented as Na2Z, where Z represents insoluble radical frame work.
When the water passes through the zeolite the hardness causing ions (Ca+2, Mg+2 etc.)
are retained by the zeolite as CaZ and MgZ respectively, while the outgoing water contains equivalent amount of sodium salts.
The block diagram and chemical reactions taking place in zeolite softener are: Ca(HCO3)2 + Na2Z → CaZ + 2NaHCO3 Mg(HCO3)2 + Na2Z → MgZ + 2NaHCO3 CaSO4 + Na2Z → CaZ + Na2SO4 CaCl2 + Na2Z → CaZ + 2NaCl MgSO4 + Na2Z → MgZ + Na2SO4 MgCl2 + Na2Z → MgZ + 2NaCl Regeneration of Zeolite Bed After some time, when the zeolite is completely changed into calcium and magnesium zeolites, then it gets exhausted (saturated with Ca+2Ca+2 and Mg+2Mg+2 ions) and it ceases to soften water.
It can be regenerated and reused by treating it with a 10% brine (sodium chloride) solution.
Regeneration reactions are CaZ+2NaCl→Na2Z+CaClMgZ+2NaCl→Na2Z+MgCl2 Advantages: 1.
Almost complete removal of hardness (10ppm) 2.
It is compact 3.
Requires only less time for softening 4.
No sludge formation since no precipitate is formed 5.
Can work under pressure also Disadvantages 1.
More sodium salt concentration in softened water.
2.
Turbidity containing water cannot be used 3.
Process exchange only Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions but cannot exchange HCO3- and CO32- ions.
So cannot be used in boilers 4.
If Fe2+ and Mn2+ are present in large quantities.
They form respective zeolites so zeolites cannot be regerated 5.
Water consisting of high alkalinity or acidity cannot be used because zeolite is decomposed.
Questions 1.
How temporary hardness differs from permanent hardness?
2.
Define hardness and estimate hardness of water by using EDTA solution?
3.
Explain Caustic embrittlement, Scale & Sludge.
4.
Explain determination of fluoride ions (F-) by ion selective electrode method.
5.
Explain softening of water using Ion exchange process.
6.
What is desalination?
Explain reverse osmosis process.
7.
Explain Steps involved in treatment of sewage water.
8.
What is Potable water and what are its specifications.
9.
Explain Steps involved in the treatment of potable water.
10.
0.28 grams of CaCO3 were dissolved in HCl and the solution was made upto one litre with distilled water.
100 ml of the above solution required 28 ml of EDTA solution on titration.
100 ml of hard water sample consumed 33 ml of same EDTA solution EBT indicator.
100 ml of this water after boiling cooling and filtering required 10 ml of EDTA solution in titration.
Calculate the permanent and temporary hardness of water sample in ppm.
11.
Explain the following?
a. Calgon conditioning and Phosphate conditioning of boiler feed water.
b.
What is defluoridation and explain Nalgonda technique.
12.
What is Hardness and calculate a sample of water is found to contains following analytical data in milligrams per litre Mg(HCO3)2 = 14.6, MgCh = 9.5, MgSO4 = 6.0 and Ca(HCO3)2 = 16.2.
Calculate temporary and permanent hardness of water in parts per million, Degree Clarke's and Degree French.
: LUBRICATION AND LUBRICANTS A substance which is capable of reducing friction between two surfaces which are sliding over each other is called Lubricant.
Due to Lubricant the co-efficient of friction between two rubbing surfaces is reduced.
The loss of energy due to friction is considerably reduced in this manner.
Petroleum is the main source of Lubricants, but synthetic Lubricants have also been prepared for specific purpose.
The lubricant acts in a number of manners.
It acts as a coolant by removing the heat of friction generated as a result of rubbing of surfaces.
In lubrication it does not allow a direct contact between the rubbing surfaces.
A thin film of lubricant lies between these rubbing surfaces under proper condition of lubrication.
In internal combustion engines, it acts as a seal by sealing the piston & cylinder wall at compression rings.
Hence there is no leakage of gases at high pressure in the combustion chamber.
Lubrication also avoids power loss in the IC engine.
The main features of lubrication are: 1.
It reduces wear and tear and surface deformation, by avoiding direct contact between the rubbing surfaces.
2.
It reduces the loss of energy in the form of heat by acting as a coolant.
3.
It reduces the efficiency of the machine by reducing the waste of energy.
4.
It reduces expansion of metal by local frictional heat.
5.
It minimizes the liberation of frictional heat and hence avoids seizure of moving surfaces.
6.
It prevents unsmooth motion relative motion of the moving or sliding parts.
7.
It reduces the maintenances as well as running cost of the machine to a large extent.
8.
As seen above it also acts as a seal in IC engines.
CLASSIFICATION OF LUBRICANTS Lubricants can be broadly classified, on the basis of their physical state, as follows: (1) Liquid lubricants or lubricating oils; (2) Semi-solid lubricants or greases, and (3) Solid lubricants.
1.
Lubricating oils Lubricating oils reduce friction and wear between two moving/sliding metallic surfaces by providing a continuous fluid film in-between them.
They also act as: (a) cooling medium; (b) sealing agent, and (c) corrosion preventer.
Good lubricating oil must possess: (a) low pressure (or high boiling point), (b) adequate viscosity for particular service conditions, (c) low freezing point, (d) high oxidation resistance.
(e) Heat stability, (f) non-corrosive properties, (g) stability to decomposition at the operating temperatures.
Lubricating oils are further classified as: (1) Animal and vegetable oils: Before the advent of the petroleum industry, oils of the vegetable and animal origins were the most commonly used lubricants.
They possess good oiliness (a property by virtue of which the oil sticks to the surface of machine parts, even under high temperatures and heavy loads).
However, they: (i) are costly, (ii) undergo oxidation easily forming gummy and acidic products and get thickened on coming in contact with air, (iii) have some tendency to hydrolyze, when allowed to remain in contact with moist- air or aqueous medium.
So at present, they are rarely used as such.
Actually, they are used as "blending agent" with other ' lubricating oils (like mineral oils) to produce desired effects in the latter.
(2) Mineral or petroleum oils are obtained by distillation of petroleum.
The length of the hydrocarbon chain in petroleum oils varies between about 12to 50 carbon atoms.
The shorter-chain oils have lower viscosity than the longer-chain hydrocarbons.
These are the most widely used lubricants, because they are; (i) cheap, (ii) available in abundance, and (iii) quite stable under service conditions.
However, they possess poor oiliness as compared to that of animal and vegetable oils.
Tile oiliness of petroleum oils can be increased by the addition of high molecular weight compounds like oleic acid, stearic acid, etc.
Purification: Crude liquid petroleum oils contain lot of impurities (like wax, asphalt,etc.)
and consequently, they have to be thoroughly purified before being put to use.
(i) The wax, if not removed, raises the pour-point and renders the lubricating oil unfit for use at low temperatures.
(ii) Certain constituents get easily oxidized under working conditions and cause sludge formation.
(iii) Some constituents mainly asphalt, undergo decomposition at higher temperatures, causing carbon deposition and sludge formation.
A number of processes are used for removing these unwanted impurities by using Dewaxing or acid refining or by solvent refining.
(3) Blended oils: No single oil saves as the most satisfactory lubricant for many of the modern machineries.
Typical properties of petroleum oils are improved by incorporating specific additives.
These so-called 'blended oils' give desired lubricating properties, required for particular machinery.
The following additives are employed (i) Oiliness-carriers: Oiliness of a lubricant can be increased by addition of an oiliness-carrier like vegetable oils (e.g., coconut oil, castor oil) and fatty acids (like palmitic acid, stearic acid, oleic acid.
etc.).
(ii) Extreme-pressure additives: Under extreme-pressure, a thick film of oil is difficult to maintain, and the oil need to have a high oiliness.
Besides improving oiliness directly, high- pressure additives are used.
these additives contain certain materials which are absorbed on the metal surface or react chemically with metal, producing a surface a layer of low shear- strength on the metal surface, thereby preventing the tearing up of the metal.
Another property of high-pressure additives is that they react, at high temperature on metal surfaces, forming surface alloys so as to prevent the welding together of the rubbing parts under severe operating conditions.
The main substances added for high-pressure lubrication are :(a) fatty ester, acids, etc., which form oxide film with the metal surface; (i) organic materials, which contain Sulphur; (c) organic chlorine compounds; (d) organic phosphorus compounds.
High-pressure lubricants also contain some lead in order to produce thin film of lead sulphide and other lead compounds on the surfaces of machines like gear teeth.
(iii) Pour-point depressing additives used are phenol and certain condensation products of chlorinated wax with naphthalene.
These prevent the separation of wax from the oil.
(iv) Viscosity-index improvers are certain high molecular weight compounds like hexanol.
(v) Thickeners such as polystyrene are materials usually of molecular weight between 300 and 3,000.
They are added in order to give the lubricating oil a higher viscosity.
(vi) Antioxidants or inhibitors, when added to oil, retard oxidation of oil by getting them- selves preferentially oxidized.
They are particularly added in lubricants used in internal combustion engines, turbines, etc., where oxidation of oil is a serious problem.
The antioxidants are aromatic, phenolic or amino compounds.
(vii) Corrosion preventers are organic compounds of phosphorus or antimony.
They protect the metal from corrosion by preventing contact between the metal surfaces and the corrosive substances.
(viii) Abrasion inhibitors like tricresyl phosphate.
(ix) Antifoaming agents (like glycols and glycerol) help in decreasing foam formation.
(x) Emulsifiers such as sodium salts of sulphonic acid.
(xi) Deposit inhibitors are detergents such as the salts of phenol and carboxylic acids.
Deposits are formed in internal combustion engine, due to imperfect combustion.
Such additive disperses and cleans the deposits.
2.
GREASES OR SEMI-SOLID LUBRICANTS Lubricating grease is a semi - solid, consisting of a soap dispersed throughout liquid lubricating oil.
The liquid lubricant may be petroleum oil or even synthetic oil and it may contain any of the additives for specific requirements.
Greases are prepared by saponification of fat (such as tallow or fatty acid) with alkali (like lime, caustic soda, etc.
), followed by adding hot lubricating oil while under agitation.
The total amount of mineral oil added determines the consistency of the finished grease.
The structure of lubricating greases is that of a gel.
Soaps are gelling agents, which give an interconnected structure (held together by intermolecular forces) containing the added oil.
At high temperatures, the soap dissolves in the oil, whereupon the interconnected structures cease to exist and the grease liquefies.
Consistency of greases may vary from a heavy viscous liquid to the of a stiff solid mass.
To improve the heat-resistance of grease, inorganic solid thickening agents (like finely divided clay, bentonite, colloidal silica, carbon black, etc.)
are added.
Greases have higher shear or frictional resistance than oils and, therefore, can support much heavier loads at lower speeds.
They also do not require as much attention unlike the lubricating liquids.
But greases have a tendency to separate into oils and soaps.
Grease are used : (i) in situations where oil cannot remain in place, due to high load, low speed, intermittent operation, sudden jerks, etc.
e.g.
rail axle boxes, (ii) in bearing and gears that work at high temperatures ; (iii) in situations where bearing needs to be sealed against entry of dust, dirt, grit or moisture, because greases are less liable to contamination by these ; (iv) in situations where dripping or spurting of oil is undesirable, because unlike oils, greases if used do not splash or drip over articles being prepared by the machine.
For example, in machines preparing paper, textiles, edible articles, etc.
The main function of soap is thickening agent so that grease sticks firmly to the metal surfaces.
However, the nature of the soap decides: (a) the temperature up to which the grease can be used; (b) its consistency; (c) Its water and oxidation resistance.
So, greases are classified after the soap used in their manufacture.
Important greases are: (i) Calcium-based greases or cup-greases are emulsions of petroleum oils with calcium soaps.
They are, generally, prepared by adding requisite amount of calcium hydroxide to hot oil (like tallow) while under agitation.
These greases are the cheapest and most commonly used.
They are insoluble in water, so water resistant.
However, they are satisfactory for use at low temperatures, because above 80oC, oil and soap begins to separate out.
(ii) Soda-base greases are petroleum oils, thickened by mixing sodium soaps.
They are not water resistant, because the sodium soap content is soluble in water.
However, they can be used up to 175oC.
They are suitable for use in ball bearings, where the lubricant gets heated due to friction.
(iii) Lithium-based greases are petroleum oils, thickened by mixing lithium soaps.
They are water-resistant and suitable for use at low temperatures [up to 15oC] only.
(iv) Axle greases are very cheap resin greases, prepared by adding lime (or any heavy metal hydroxide) to resin and fatty oils.
The mixture is thoroughly mixed and allowed to stand, when grease floats as stiff mass.
Filters (like talc and mica) are also added to them.
They are water- resistant and suitable for less delicate equipments working under high loads and at low speeds.
Besides the above, there are greases prepared by dispersing solids (like graphite, soapstone) in mineral oil.
These are mostly used in rail axle boxes, machine bearings, tractors rollers, wires ropes etc.
3.
SOLID LUBRICANTS Solid lubricants are used where: (i) operating conditions are such that a lubricating film cannot be secured by use of lubricating oils or greases; (ii) contamination (by the entry of dust or grit particles) of lubricating oil or grease is unacceptable, (iii) the operating temperatures or load is too high even for a semi-solid lubricant to remain in position; and (iv) combustible lubricants must be avoided.
The two most usual solid lubricants employed are graphite and molybdenum disulphide.
Graphite consists of a multitude of flat plates, one atom thick, which are held together by only weak bonds, so that the force to shear the crystals parallel to the layers is low.
Consequently, the parallel layers slide over one another easily.
Usually, some organic substances are mixed solid lubricants so that they may stick firmly to the metal surface.
On the other hand, molybdenum disulphide has a sandwich like structure in which a layer of a Mo atoms lies between two layers of S atoms.
Poor interlaminar attraction is responsible for low shear strength in a direction parallel to the layers.
Solids lubricants are used either in the dry powder or mixed with water or oil.
The solids fill up the low spots in the surfaces of moving parts and form solid films, which have low frictional resistance.
The usual coefficient of friction between solid lubricants is between 0.005 and 0.01.
(a) Graphite is the most widely used of all solid lubricants.
It is very soapy to touch, non- inflammable and not oxidized in air below 375oC.
In the absence of air, it can be used upto very much higher temperatures.
Graphite is used either in powdered form or as suspension.
Suspension of graphite in oil or water is brought about with the help of an emulsifying agent like tannin.
When graphite is dispersed in oil, it is called 'oildag' and when it is dispersed in water; it is called 'aquadag'.
Oildag is found particularly useful in internal combustion engines, because it forms a film between the piston rings and the cylinder and gives a tight-fit contact, thereby increasing compression.
On the other hand, oildag is useful where a lubricant free from oil is needed.
e.g., foodstuffs industry.
Graphite is also mixed with greases to form graphite-greases, which are used at still higher temperatures.
Uses: As lubricant in air-compressors, lathes, general machine-shop works, foodstuffs industry, railway track-joints, open gears, chains, cast iron bearings, internal combustion engine, etc.
(b) Molybdenum disulphide possesses very low coefficient of friction and is stable in air up to 400oC.
Its fine powder may be sprinkled on surfaces sliding at high velocities, when it fills low spots in metal surfaces, forming its film.
It is also used along with solvents and in greases.
Besides the more important graphite and molybdenum disulphide, other substances like soapstone, talc, mica, etc., are also used as solid lubricants.
4.
SYNTHETIC LUBRICANTS Modern synthetic lubricants possess, in general, the following distinguishing characteristics: (1) non-inflammable, (ii) high flash points, (iii) high thermal stability at high operating temperatures, (iv) high viscosity-index, (v) chemical stability, etc.
Important synthetic lubricants are given below.
(1) Polymerized hydrocarbons like polyethylene, polypropylene, polybutylene in the molecular weight range of 500 to 50,000 are residue-free, light in color, free from non- hydrocarbon impurities, chemically non-reactive and high temperature lubricants.
(2) Polyglycols and related compounds like polyethylene glycol, polypropylene glycol, polyglycidyl ethers, and higher polyalkylene oxides can be used as water-soluble as well as water-insoluble lubricants in rubber bearings and joints.
Polyglycidyl ethers and higher polyalkylene oxides are water-insoluble, but they can absorb a considerable amount of water.
(3) Organic amines, imines and amides are good synthetic lubricants, since they possess low pour-points and high viscosity-index.
They can be used under temperature conditions of -50oC to 250oC (4) Silicones are very good synthetic lubricants, because are not oxidized below 200oC and possess high viscosity-index.
(5) Fluorocarbons are not decomposed by heat, not easily oxidizable and chemically inert and resistant to chemicals, except molten sodium.
LUBRICATING EMULSIONS An emulsion is two-phase system, consisting of a fairly coarse dispersion of two immiscible liquids, the one being dispersed as fine droplets in the other.
The disperse (or the internal) phase is the liquid that is broken into droplets.
The surrounding liquid is known as the continuous or external or dispersing phase.
Usually, the size of dispersed droplets varies from 1 to 6 micron.
A dispersion system consisting of two immiscible liquids is inherently unstable, and to increase its stability, a third agent, called emulsifier or emulsifying agent, is added.
Emulsifiers are compounds exhibiting both polar and non-polar character.
The emulsifier molecule contains a hydrophobic-end and a hydrophilic end.
Hydrophobic-end of the molecule is preferably wetted by oil; whereas the hydrophilic-end is wetted by water.
Thus, emulsifier molecule is adsorbed at the interface of the two phases (oil and water), resulting in the formation of a protective film around the dispersed droplets.
A Sodium Soap molecule illustrates well the functioning of an emulsifier.
The sodium soap is the sodium salt of a long chain fatty acids like C15H31COONa, possessing a hydrophilic group -COONa and hydrophobic-end, C15H31.
Geometric calculations have shown that the maximum amount of dispersed phase in the other liquid can be 74.02% of the total volume.
Thus, a water-oil emulsion mixture with less than 26% oil would tend to form an O/W emulsion; whereas a mixture with more than 74% oil would result in a W/O emulsion.
Composition between 26 and 74% can result in both types of emulsion.
(a) Oil in-water emulsions are obtained by adding oil containing about 3-20% water-soluble emulsifying agent to a suitable quantity of wafer.
The most usual emulsifying agents are sodium soaps and sodium and potassium salts of sulphonic acids.
The main use of such an emulsion is as cooling and lubricating liquid for cutting tools.
Another use is lubrication for certain rather heavy sliding components such as pistons in marine diesel engines and large internal combustion engines.
Such emulsions also give rust protection.
(b) Water-in-oil emulsions are prepared by 'mixing together water containing about 1 to 10 % water- soluble emulsifier (Like alkaline-earth soap, e.g., calcium stearate) with oil.
These emulsions possess much higher viscosity than that of the oil from which they are prepared.
An emulsion which uses about 40% water by volume is widely used to lubricate compressors and pneumatic tools.
They provide cooling effect (due to the evaporation of water), besides lubrication action.
Characteristics: A good lubricant generally possesses the following characteristics: A high boiling point and low freezing point (in order to stay liquid within a wide range of temperature) A high viscosity index.
Thermal stability.
Hydraulic stability.
Demulsibility.
Corrosion prevention.
A high resistance to oxidation.
Anti scoring property Water antiaffinity property Anti foaming property Anti scoring property: Lubricants should have the property to prevent the scoring failure of tooth surface under high pressure of load.
Water anti affinity property: Moisture tends to condense due to temp.
change when the gears are stopped.
Lubricants should have the property of isolating moisture and water from it.
Anti foaming property: Lubricants should form no foam under agitation.
More Discussion on property: VISCOSITY INDEX : Viscosity index is an expression of effect of change of temperature on the viscosity of oils.
This change can be evaluated numerically and the result is expressed as VI.
It Is the avg.
Decrease in viscosity of oil per degree rise in temp between 100Of AND 2100F.
Silicones, poly glycol ethers, diesters and trimesters have high VI.
Drop Point: It is that temp at which grease passes from the semi liquid to liquid state.
It determines the upper temp limit for the application of grease.
FLASH POINT: Flash point is the temperature at which the oil gives off sufficient vapors which can be ignited.
It reflects on the capability of the oil to work at higher temperature without any fire hazard.
Cloud point It is the temperature below which wax in diesel forms a cloudy appearance.
In general it is that temp at which the lubricant becomes cloudy or hazy when cooled.
And that waxes thickens the oil and clogs fuel filters and injectors in engines.
pour point is the minimum temperature at which a lubricants turns into semi solid and almost losses its flow characteristic.
Both indicate suitability of lubricant in cold conditions and must be low.
It reflects on the capability of the oil to work at low temperatures.
Iodine Number: It is the no.
Of gm.
equivalent of I2 to the amount of ICL absorbed by 100 gm of oil.
Each oil has specific I N. It determines the extent of contamination of oil/ amount of un saturation in oil.
Low IN is good for oil.ICL-Wijs solution.
RCH=CHR + ICl →RCHI-CH(Cl)R IN Oil Type Example >150 drying linseed, tung oil 100-150 semidrying castor, soyabeen <100 non-drying olive, cocanut Aniline point: It is the minimum temp at which oil is miscible with equal amount of aniline.
It is a measure of aromatic content of an oil.
It is an indication of possible determination of rubber sealing.
Aniline + sample oil → Homogeneous solution → cloudiness Emulsion Number: It is the property of water to get mixed with oil easily or the reverse.
A good lubricating oil should form such an emulsion with water which breaks easily.
This is known as demulsification.
The time in seconds in which a given volume of oils and water separates out into distinct layers is called demulsification number.
A good lubricating oil should have low demulsification number.
In cutting oils the higher the emulsification number, better the oil is.
Emulsion acts both as lubricant & coolant.
It is of the following types.
OIW - (26% O+ 74% W) ---- Sodium& potassium salt of sulphuric acid as dispersed phase and water as medium.
Milk, Vanishing cream WIO--- (74% O+26% W)----- water as dispersed phase & oil as dispersion medium ( Butter, cold cream) Lubrication Mechanism: Thick Film Mechanism: In this case the sliding surfaces are separated completely by applying a thin uniform film of liquid lubricants between them.
The thickness of liquid film is at least 1000 Armstrong.
The liquid lubricants do not have any chemical affinity to the metal surface and it sticks to it due to viscosity.
The liquid film covers all irregularities in the sliding surface and thus prevents formation of welded junction and hence avoids contact between sliding surface.
The liquid lubricant must have between sliding surface.
The liquid lubricant must have sufficient viscosity so as to maintain the fluid film in its place.
If viscosity is higher, a large amount of energy is required.
When the load is applied, the pressure developed in the lubricant is sufficient to keep moving surfaces apart and hence it known as hydrodynamic lubrication.
It occurs in journal bearing.
This type of lubrication is used in watches, clocks, electric motors, turbines etc.
Thin Film/Boundary Lubrication : Boundary lubrication exists when the operating condition are such that it is not possible to establish a full fluid condition, particularly at low relative speeds between the moving or sliding surfaces.
The oil film thickness may be reduced to such a degree that metal to metal contact occurs between the moving surfaces.
The oil film thickness is so small that oiliness becomes predominant for boundary lubrication.
Boundary lubrication happens when A shaft starts moving from rest.
The speed is very low.
The load is very high.
Viscosity of the lubricant is too low.
Examples for boundary lubrication: Guide and guide shoe in two stroke engine.
Lubrication of the journal bearing in diesel engines (mainly during starting and stopping of engine).
Piston rings and when cylinder liner is at TDC and BDC position when the piston direction changes and if the relative speed is very slow.
Extreme pressure Lubrication When the moving or sliding surfaces are under very high pressure and speed, a high local temperature is attained.
Under such condition, liquid lubricant fails to stick to the moving parts and may decompose and even vaporize.
To meet this extreme pressure condition, special additives are added to the minerals oils.
These are called "extreme pressure lubrication."
These additives form on the metal surfaces more durable films capable of withstanding high loads and high temperature.
Additives are organic compounds like chlorine (as in chlorinated esters), sulphur (as in sulphurized oils), and phosphorus (as in tricresyl phosphate).
: CORROSION Corrosion is the gradual deterioration of a metal from its surface due to the chemical or electrochemical interaction with a corrosive environment.
It is a diffusion- controlled process so it occurs on exposed surfaces.
Types of corrosion: 1) Chemical or Dry 2) Electrochemical or wet Dry corrosion: By oxidation, By other gases, By liquid metal A) Oxidation: Due to direct oxidation of oxygen on metals in the absence of moisture.
2M +nO2→ 2M n+ + 2nO2- →Mn2 O3 At low temp.
all alkali and alkaline metals are oxidised easily where as at high temp.
except Ag, Au and Pt, all other metals are oxidised.
B) Liquid- Metal corrosion: By passing a liquid metal over a solid metal at high temp.
which leads to the weakening of the metal surface either due to its dissolution in liquid metal or penetration of liquid metal in to the solid surface.
EX) Coolant ( Na metal) leads to corrosion of cadmium in a nuclear reactor.
C) Corrosion by other gases : Gases like chlorine and H2S show corrosive effect on a metal surface due to their chemical affinity.
2Ag +Cl2 → 2AgCl ( AgCl coating is protective) Sn +2Cl2 → SnCl4 ( SnCl4 is volatile and hence non-protective) Electrochemical Corrosion: It is mostly through the formation of galvanic cells.
It involves mostly separate anode and cathode between which the current flows/ corrosion at anode generates metal ions/ non-metallic ions like OH- & O2- at cathode./ diffusion of ions through the conducting medium/ a single metal partly behaving as anode and cathode due to differential aeration.
EX) Rusting of iron : Reactions: Oxidation : Fe - 2e → Fe2+ Reduction : a) Oxygen Absorption 4H+ +O2 +4e →2H2O (Acidic medium) 2H2O+ O2+4e → 4OH- (neutral medium) b) Hydrogen Evolution( Absence of oxygen) : 2H++ 2e → H2 ( Acidic medium) 2H2O +2e → H2 +2OH- (neutral or alkaline) Final Reaction : Fe2+ + 2OH- → Fe(OH)2 .
This in presence of excess oxygen oxidised to Fe(OH)3.
Which is RUST, Fe2O3.3H2O.
Pilling Bedworth Rule: Ratio of the volume of the oxide film/ coating formed to the volume of the metal consumed.
P. B Ratio = volume of metal oxide/ volume of metal Also known as specific volume, it carries significance for determining rate of corrosion.
case-1 → volume of oxide > volume of metal, PBR > 1, Protective ( Ti, Al, Cr, Cu) case-2 → volume of oxide < volume of metal, PBR < 1, Non protective ( Li, Na, K, Mg) case-3 → volume of oxide >> volume of metal, PBR > 2, Non protective (Mo, W, Nb) Metal PBR Pb 1.4 Ni 1.52 Cr 1.99 Cu 1.68 K 0.45 Li 0.78 Nb 2.61 TYPES OF ELECTROCHEMICAL CORROSION PITTING CORROSION Pitting is one of the most destructive types of corrosion, as it can be hard to predict, detect and characterize.
Pitting is a localized form of corrosion, in which either a local anodic point, or more commonly a cathodic point, forms a small corrosion cell with the surrounding normal surface.
Once a pit has initiated, it grows into a "hole" or "cavity" that takes on one of a variety of different shapes.
Pits typically penetrate from the surface downward in a vertical direction.
Pitting corrosion can be caused by a local break or damage to the protective oxide film or a protective coating; it can also be caused by non-uniformities in the metal structure itself.
Pitting is dangerous because it can lead to failure of the structure with a relatively low overall loss of metal.
CREVICE CORROSION Crevice corrosion is also a localized form of corrosion and usually results from a stagnant microenvironment in which there is a difference in the concentration of ions between two areas of a metal.
Crevice corrosion occurs in shielded areas such as those under washers, bolt heads, gaskets, etc.
where oxygen is restricted.
These smaller areas allow for a corrosive agent to enter but do not allow enough circulation within, depleting the oxygen content, which prevents re-passivation.
As a stagnant solution builds, pH shifts away from neutral.
This growing imbalance between the crevice (microenvironment) and the external surface (bulk environment) contributes to higher rates of corrosion.
Crevice corrosion can often occur at lower temperatures than pitting.
Proper joint design helps to minimize crevice corrosion.
INTERGRANULAR CORROSION An examination of the microstructure of a metal reveals the grains that form during solidification of the alloy, as well as the grain boundaries between them.
Intergranular corrosion can be caused by impurities present at these grain boundaries or by the depletion or enrichment of an alloying element at the grain boundaries.
Intergranular corrosion occurs along or adjacent to these grains, seriously affecting the mechanical properties of the metal while the bulk of the metal remain intact.
An example of intergranular corrosion is carbide precipitation, a chemical reaction that can occur when a metal is subjected to very high temperatures (e.g., 800°F - 1650°F) and/or localized hot work such as welding.
In stainless steels, during these reactions, carbon "consumes" the chromium, forming carbides and causing the level of chromium remaining in the alloy to drop below the 11% needed to sustain the spontaneously-forming passive oxide layer.
304L and 316L are enhanced chemistries of 304 and 316 stainless that contain lower levels of carbon, and would provide the best corrosion resistance to carbide precipitation.
STRESS CORROSION CRACKING (SCC) Stress corrosion cracking (SCC) is a result of the combination of tensile stress and a corrosive environment, often at elevated temperatures.
Stress corrosion may result from external stress such as actual tensile loads on the metal or expansion/contraction due to rapid temperature changes.
It may also result from residual stress imparted during the manufacturing process such as from cold forming, welding, machining, grinding, etc.
In stress corrosion, the majority of the surface usually remains intact; however, fine cracks appear in the microstructure, making the corrosion hard to detect.
The cracks typically have a brittle appearance and form and spread in a direction perpendicular to the location of the stress.
Selecting proper materials for a given environment (including temperature and management of external loads) can mitigate the potential for catastrophic failure due to SCC.
GALVANIC CORROSION Galvanic corrosion is the degradation of one metal near a joint or juncture that occurs when two electrochemically dissimilar metals are in electrical contact in an electrolytic environment; for example, when copper is in contact with steel in a saltwater environment.
However, even when these three conditions are satisfied, there are many other factors that affect the potential for, and the amount of, corrosion, such as temperature and surface finish of the metals.
Large engineered systems employing many types of metal in their construction, including various fastener types and materials, are susceptible to galvanic corrosion if care is not exercised during the design phase.
Choosing metals that are as close together as practicable on the galvanic series helps reduce the risk of galvanic corrosion.
CONCLUSION In aqueous environments, metals may be exposed to not only uniform corrosion, but also to various types of local corrosion including pitting, crevice, intergranular, stress, and galvanic corrosion.
In areas where corrosion is a concern, stainless steel products offer value and protection against these threats.
Stainless' favorable chemical composition makes it resistant to many common corrosives while remaining significantly more affordable than specialty alloys such as titanium and Inconel® alloys.
Stainless steel is a highly alloyed, low-carbon steel with a high (at least 11%) chromium content.
When exposed to an oxygenated environment, the chromium reacts to form a passive oxide layer on the metal's surface, slowing further oxidation and providing a self- healing quality, which helps resist uniform and local corrosion.
Nickel helps to stabilize the microstructure, increasing SCC resistance.
Metal corrosion is a slow process of destruction of metal objects, after chemical reactions that occur on the surface of metals, alloys, under the action of the environment.
Corrosion process is influenced by a number of internal and external factors.
Factors affecting rate of corrosion: Several factors affecting the rate of the corrosion, which can be divided into two parts: 1) Factors affecting on metal (related to the metal) 2) Factors affecting on corrosive environment.
Factors affecting the metals: 1.
Nature of the metal: The tendency of the metal to undergo corrosion is mainly dependent on the nature of the metal.
IN general the metal with lower electrode potential have more reactive and more susceptible for corrosion and metal with high electrode potential are less reactive and less susceptible for corrosion for egs: metals like K, Na, Mg, Zn etc have low electrode potential are undergo corrosion very easily, where as noble metals like Ag, Au, Pt have higher electrode potential, their corrosion rate are negligible but there are few exception for this general trend as some metals show the property of passivity like Al, Cr, Ti, Ta etc.
2.
Surface state of the metal or nature of the corrosion product (passivity): The corrosion product is usually the oxide of the metal; the nature of the product determines the rate of further corrosion process.
If the oxide layer, which forms on the surface, is stoichiometric, highly insoluble and non-porous in nature with low ionic and electronic conductivity then that type of products layer effectively prevents further corrosion, which acts as a protective film.
For egs: Al, Cr, Ti develop such a layer on their surface and become passive to corrosion and some metal like Ta, Zr and Mo not only forms such a protective layers but are capable of self repairing oxide films when it is damaged.
Hence these are extremely passive metals.
If the oxide layer forms on the metal surface is non-stochiometric, soluble, unstable and porous in nature and have an appreciable conductivity, they cannot control corrosion on the metal surface for egs: oxide layer formed on metals like Zn, Fe, Mg etc.
3.
Anodic and Cathodic area: The rate of the corrosion is greatly influenced by the relative sizes of cathodic and anodic areas.
If the metal has smaller the anodic area and larger the cathodic area exposed to corrosive atmosphere, more intense and faster is the corrosion occurring at anodic area because at anode oxidation takes place and electrons are liberated.
At the cathode these electrons are consumed.
When anode is smaller and cathode region is larger all the liberated electrons at anode are rapidly consumed.
This process makes the anodic reaction to takes place at its maximum rate thus increasing the corrosion rate.
If the cathode is smaller and reverse process takes place decrease rate of corrosion.
For egs: If tin (Sn) coated on iron (Fe) and in that some area are not covered or some pin holes are left, there forms smaller anodic area and larger cathodic area because tin is cathodic with respect to iron so intense localized corrosion takes place.
On the other hand if Zn coated to Fe then if there are some pin holes are there creates larger anodic area and smaller cathodic area because Fe is cathodic with respect to zinc so that rate of corrosion is veryless.
4.
Hydrogen over voltage: A metal with low hydrogen over voltage on its surface is more susceptible for corrosion.
When the cathodic reaction is hydrogen evolution type with low hydrogen over voltage, liberation of H2 gas is more easier so that cathodic reaction is very fast, that makes anodic reaction faster hence overall corrosion process is very fast.
If the H2 over voltage is high so cathodic reaction is slow hence corrosion reaction also slower.
Corrosion Protection & Prevention: In virtually all situations, metal corrosion can be managed, slowed, or even stopped by using the proper techniques.
Corrosion prevention can take a number of forms depending on the circumstances of the metal being corroded.
Corrosion prevention techniques can be generally classified into 6 groups: 1) Environmental Modification Corrosion is caused by chemical interactions between metal and gasses in the surrounding environment.
By removing the metal from, or changing, the type of environment, metal deterioration can be immediately reduced.
This may be as simple as limiting contact with rain or seawater by storing metal materials indoors or could be in the form of direct manipulation of the environment affecting the metal.
Methods to reduce the sulfur, chloride, or oxygen content in the surrounding environment can limit the speed of metal corrosion.
For example, feed water for water boilers can be treated with softeners or other chemical media to adjust the hardness, alkalinity or oxygen content in order to reduce corrosion on the interior of the unit.
2)Metal Selection and Surface Conditions No metal is immune to corrosion in all environments, but through monitoring and understanding the environmental conditions that are the cause of corrosion, changes to the type of metal being used can also lead to significant reductions in corrosion.
Metal corrosion resistance data can be used in combination with information on the environmental conditions to make decisions regarding the suitability of each metal.
The development of new alloys, designed to protect against corrosion in specific environments, is constantly under production.
Hastelloy nickel alloys, Nirosta steels, and Timetal titanium alloys are all examples of alloys designed for corrosion prevention.
Monitoring of surface conditions is also critical in protecting against metal deterioration from corrosion.
Cracks, crevices or asperous surfaces, whether a result of operational requirements, wear and tear, or manufacturing flaws, all can result in greater rates of corrosion.
Proper monitoring and the elimination of unnecessarily vulnerable surface conditions, along with taking steps to ensure that systems are designed to avoid reactive metal combinations and that corrosive agents are not used in the cleaning or maintenance of metal parts are all also part of effective corrosion reduction program.
3)Cathodic Protection Galvanic corrosion occurs when two different metals are situated together in a corrosive electrolyte.
This a common problem for metals submerged together in seawater, but can also occur when two dissimilar metals are immersed in close proximity in moist soils.
For these reasons, galvanic corrosion often attacks ship hulls, offshore rigs, and oil and gas pipelines.
Cathodic protection works by converting unwanted anodic (active) sites on a metal's surface to cathodic (passive) sites through the application of an opposing current.
This opposing current supplies free electrons and force local anodes to be polarized to the potential of the local cathodes.
Cathodic protection can take two forms.
The first is the introduction of galvanic anodes.
This method, known as a sacrificial system, uses metal anodes, introduced to the electrolytic environment, to sacrifice themselves (corrode) in order to protect the cathode.
While the metal needing protection can vary, sacrificial anodes are generally made of zinc, aluminum, or magnesium, metals that have the most negative electro-potential.
The galvanic series provides a comparison of the different electro-potential - or nobility - of metals and alloys.
In a sacrificial system, metallic ions move from the anode to the cathode, which leads the anode to corrode more quickly than it otherwise would.
As a result, the anode must regularly be replaced.
The second method of cathodic protection is referred to as impressed current protection.
This method, which is often used to protect buried pipelines and ship hulls, requires an alternative source of direct electrical current to be supplied to the electrolyte.
The negative terminal of the current source is connected to the metal, while the positive terminal is attached to an auxiliary anode, which is added to complete the electrical circuit.
Unlike a galvanic (sacrificial) anode system, in an impressed current protection system, the auxiliary anode is not sacrificed.
4)Inhibitors Corrosion inhibitors are chemicals that react with the metal's surface or the environmental gasses causing corrosion, thereby, interrupting the chemical reaction that causes corrosion.
Inhibitors can work by adsorbing themselves on the metal's surface and forming a protective film.
These chemicals can be applied as a solution or as a protective coating via dispersion techniques.
The inhibitor's process of slowing corrosion depends upon: Changing the anodic or cathodic polarization behavior Decreasing the diffusion of ions to the metal's surface Increasing the electrical resistance of the metal's surface Major end-use industries for corrosion inhibitors are petroleum refining, oil and gas exploration, chemical production and water treatment facilities.
The benefit of corrosion inhibitors is that they can be applied in-situ to metals as a corrective action to counter unexpected corrosion.
5)Coatings Paints and other organic coatings are used to protect metals from the degradative effect of environmental gasses.
Coatings are grouped by the type of polymer employed.
Common organic coatings include: Alkyd and epoxy ester coatings that, when air dried, promote cross-link oxidation Two-part urethane coatings Both acrylic and epoxy polymer radiation curable coatings Vinyl, acrylic or styrene polymer combination latex coatings Water-soluble coatings High-solid coatings Powder coatings 6)Plating Metallic coatings, or plating, can be applied to inhibit corrosion as well as provide aesthetic, decorative finishes.
There are four common types of metallic coatings but the common one is given below.
Electroplating: A thin layer of metal - often nickel, tin, or chromium - is deposited on the substrate metal (generally steel) in an electrolytic bath.
The electrolyte usually consists of a water solution containing salts of the metal to be deposited.
Questions: 1.
Which series ( Galvanic/ Electrochemical) predicts the relative corrosive tendencies of a metal?
2.
Galvanic corrosion is also differential metal corrosion.
3.
Out of copper, chromium and iron which is unstable and protective?
4.
State the reason for : wire mesh corrodes faster at the joints./ corrosion occurs in steel pipe connected to copper plumbing 5.
How to prevent corrosion of metals due to moisture?
6.
Give basic difference between galvanization and tinning.
7. soil having more porosity will have high corrosion.
8.
Hygroscopic suspended particles cause more corrosion.
9.
Annealing is a useful process.
10.
Smaller the grain size of metal, faster is corrosion.
11.
SO2 and H2S increase corrosion.
12.
L,T and V type joints should be avoided.
13.
Sn undergoes severe corrosion in presence of chlorine but not Ag.
14.
Sn-coated iron articles are free from any damage.
15.
Part of nail inside the wood undergoes corrosion.
16.
Bolts and nuts may be made of same metals.
17.
Deposition of small dust particles on metal surface must be avoided.
18.
Mg sheets are best suited for protection.
19.
Brass containers are not cleaned by alkaline solution.
20.
Justify that corrosion is a diffusion process.
: ENERGY SCIENCE A fuel is any combustible material that can be made to react with other substances so that it releases energy.
Types of Fuels: Fuels can be generally classified into two types.
1.
On the basis of their fuels state/ physical state of aggregation: Solid Fuels Liquid Fuels Gaseous Fuels 2.
On the basis of their occurrence/ source: Natural Fuels Artificial Fuels Examples of Fuels: Natural Fuels Artificial Fuels Solid Fuels Wood, Coal, Oil Shale Tanbark, Bagasse, Straw, Charcoal, Coke Coal, Briquettes Liquid Fuels Petroleum Oils from distillation of petroleum, Coal Tar, LPG, Shale-Oil, Alcohols, etc.
Gaseous Fuels Natural Gas Coal gas, Bio gas, CNG Producer Gas, Water Gas, Hydrogen, Acetylene, Blast Furnace Gas, Oil Gas Solid Fuels Advantages: Easier transportation and storage.
Low production cost.
Moderate ignition temperature.
Disadvantages: Large portion of energy is wasted.
Cost of handling is high and controlling is also hard.
Ash content is high & burn with clinker formation.
Liquid Fuels: Advantages: Higher calorific value per unit mass.
Burn without ash, clinkers, etc.
Controlling the combustion is easier.
Transportation easier through pipes and stored indefinitely without loss.
Loss of energy is comparatively lower.
Require less furnace space for combustion.
Disadvantages: Cost of liquid fuel is much higher compared to solid fuel.
Storage methods are costlier.
Greater risk of fire hazards.
Special burning equipment required for more efficient combustion.
Gaseous Fuels: Advantages: Transportation through pipes is easy.
Sparking combustion is really easy.
They have a higher heat content.
Clean after use.
Do not require any special burner technology.
Disadvantages: Large storage tanks required.
As they are highly inflammable, the chance for fire hazards are extremely high and strict safety measures need to be followed.
Fossil Fuel: Fossil fuels are the dead and decayed remains of plants and animals subjected to decades of pressure and temperature under the earth's crust.
Primarily fossil fuels are hydrocarbons.
They are convenient and effective.
They provide the calorific value required to fulfill our needs.
Even though they are available in plenty right now, they are a non-renewable source of energy.
The burning of fossil fuels is responsible for a large section of the world's pollution index.
Types of fossil fuels: Coal Oil Natural Gas Characteristics of a good fuel 1) High calorific value 2) Moderate ignition temp as low temp can cause fire hazard where as high value makes it difficult to ignite.3) low moisture content 4) low non-combustible matter.
Other factors include moderate rate of combustion, low cost, uniform size.
calorific value (plural calorific values): The amount of energy produced by the complete combustion of a material or fuel.
Measured in units of energy per amount of material, e.g.
kJ/kg.
The amount of energy available from an item of food when digested, mostly from carbohydrates and fats.
The calorific value is a characteristic for each substance.
It is measured in units of energy per unit of the substance, usually mass, such as: kcal/kg, kJ/kg, J/mol, Btu/m³.
Heating value is commonly determined by use of a bomb calorimeter.
1 calorie--- Heat required to increase temp.
of 1gm of water through 10c.
1 B.Th.
U---- Amount of heat reqd.
to raise temp of 1 pound of water through 10F.
Centrigrade Heat Unit----Quanty of heat required to raise temp.
of 1 pound of water through 10c.
1 Kcal =39.68 B.Th.U =2.2C.H.U HCV: HCV is the amount of heat or energy liberated from the combustion of a fuel when its byproducts are condensed to recover some of the energy released from the combustion.
In comparison, LCV is the amount of energy liberated from the combustion of a fuel when its byproducts freely escape.
During the use of any fuel, water vapors and moisture etc.
escape as such along with the combustion gases.
As they are not condensed, a lower amount of heat is available.
LCV = HCV- Latent heat of vapors formed Since 1 part by mass of hydrogen produces 9 parts by mass of water.
Hence, LCV= HCV- mass of H2 × Latent heat of steam Latent heat of steam = 587Kcal/Kg or 1060 B.T.U/lb Unit Conversion: 1Kcal/Kg = 1.8 B. T .U 1Kcal/ m3 = 0.1077 B.T.U/ft3 1B.T.U/ft3 = 9.3 K cal/ m3 Calculation If oxygen is present in the fuel, it is in the combination with H2 as fixed hydrogen (H2O).
2H2 +O2 → 2H2O 8 parts of O2combine with1 part of H2.
Fixed hydrogen = mass of oxygen in fuel/ 8 Amount of H2 available for combustion =Total mass of H2 in the fuel - fixed H2 =(H-O/8) H2O formed from 1 gm of H2 = 9 gm H2O formed from H/100 gm of H2 = 9X H/100 gm = 0.09H gm Latent Heat of steam = 587 cal/gm, Latent heat of water vapour = 0.09H X 587 cal/gm.
LCV = HCV-0.09X587 cal/gm Theoretical Calculation of calorific value of a fuel: Calorific value of a fuel is the sum of the calorific value of all components present.
Constituent Hydrogen Carbon Sulphur HCV(Kcal/Kg) 34,500 8080 2420 Dulong's Formula : HCV = 1/100[8080C +34500(H-O/8) +2240S] Kcal/kg Calorific value of Fuels: Wood - 2500 kcal/kg CNG-- 4900 kcal/m3 Producer gas- 2800 kcal/m3 Natural gas---12000 kcal/kg LPG-27800 kcal/kg Kerosene-11100 kcal/kg Diesel- 11000 kcal/kg Petrol-11250 kcal/kg Electricity--- 860 kcal/kwh Fractional distillation of crude oil: Fractional distillation separates a mixture into a number of different parts, called fractions.
A tall fractionating column is fitted above the mixture, with several condensers coming off at different heights.
The column is hot at the bottom and cool at the top.
Substances with high boiling points condense at the bottom and substances with lower boiling points condense on the way to the top.
Crude oil is a mixture of hydrocarbons.
The crude oil is evaporated and its vapours condense at different temperatures in the fractionating column.
Each fraction contains hydrocarbon molecules with a similar number of carbon atoms and a similar range of boiling points.
Oil fractions: The diagram below summarizes the main fractions from crude oil and their uses, and the trends in properties.
Note that the gases leave at the top of the column, the liquids condense in the middle and the solids stay at the bottom.
The fractionating column As we go up the fractionating column, the hydrocarbons have: 1. lower boiling points 2. lower viscosity (they flow more easily) 3. higher flammability (they ignite more easily).
The various components of crude oil have different sizes, weights and boiling temperatures; so, the first step is to separate these components.
Because they have different boiling temperatures, they can be separated easily by a process called fractional distillation.
The steps of fractional distillation are as follows: 1.
You heat the mixture of two or more substances (liquids) with different boiling points to a high temperature.
Heating is usually done with high pressure steam to temperatures of about 1112 degrees Fahrenheit / 600 degrees Celsius.
2.
The mixture boils, forming vapor (gases); most substances go into the vapor phase.
3.
The vapor enters the bottom of a long column (fractional distillation column) that is filled with trays or plates.
The trays have many holes or bubble caps (like a loosened cap on a soda bottle) in them to allow the vapor to pass through.
They increase the contact time between the vapor and the liquids in the column and help to collect liquids that form at various heights in the column.
There is a temperature difference across the column (hot at the bottom, cool at the top).
4.
The vapor rises in the column.
5.
As the vapor rises through the trays in the column, it cools.
6.
When a substance in the vapor reaches a height where the temperature of the column is equal to that substance's boiling point, it will condense to form a liquid.
(The substance with the lowest boiling point will condense at the highest point in the column; substances with higher boiling points will condense lower in the column.).
7.
The trays collect the various liquid fractions.
8.
The collected liquid fractions may pass to condensers, which cool them further, and then go to storage tanks, or they may go to other areas for further chemical processing Fractional distillation is useful for separating a mixture of substances with narrow differences in boiling points, and is the most important step in the refining process.
Before fractional distillation, water is separated by Cottrell's process which allows the oil to flow between two highly charged electrodes.
The colloidal water-droplets coalesce to form a large drop, which separate out.
Similarly, harmful 'S' compounds can be removed by treatment with copper oxide to give solid copper sulphide that is filtered out.
Diesel Cheaper, less consumption per unit power produced, Thermal efficiency higher, Exhaust gases contain less pollutants( CO2, Hydrocarbon), Expensive fuel injection device Petrol costilier, more consumption., lower thermal efficiency, Emit higher pollutants, simple IC engine Refining of gasoline: Very much necessary as it contains some undesirable unsaturated hydrocarbons and sulphur compounds.
The former gets oxidized & polymerized, thus causing gums & sludge formation on storing.
Sulphur compounds corrode IC engines.
Process: Sulphur compounds are generally removed by treating with alkaline solution of sodium plumbite with controlled addition of sulphur.
This process is called 'Sweetening of petrol' .Final conversion is known as 'Doctor's Process'.
2RSH + Na2Pbo2 → Pb(SR)2 +2NaOH Pb(SR)2 →PbSs + RSSR The disulphides are extracted with a suitable solvent.
Olefins & colouring matters of gasoline are removed by percolating gasoline through Fuller's earth , which adsorbs the other olefins & colours.
After refining, some inhibitors are added.
These retard oxidation process thereby improving the storing.
Cracking of petrol: Cracking, in petroleum refining, is the process by which heavy hydrocarbon molecules are broken up into lighter molecules by means of heat and usually pressure and sometimes catalysts.
Cracking is the most important process for the commercial production of gasoline and diesel fuel.
C10H22 → C5H12 + C5H10 Decane n-pentane pentene Types of Cracking Thermal Cracking and Catalytic Cracking.
Cracking is a process by which complex high molecular weight organic compounds are broken down into smaller fragments of molecules.
The complex high molecular weight organic compounds are generally long chained hydrocarbons such as petroleum.
Thermal is further divided in to liquid & vapour phase.
Catalytic is of fixed bed & moving bed.
Thermal cracking: No catalyst used heavy oils are subjected to high temp & pressure.
Characteristics Liquid Phase Vapour phase Cracking temp 475-5300c 600-630 Pressure 100 kg/cm2 10-20 KG/ cm2 Yield of petrol 50-60 % > 60% Octane rating 65-70 > 70 Time reqd.
More less Catalytic Cracking: Much lower temp& pressure than thermal/ Suitable catalyst used are Al2O3, Al2 ( SiO3)3, Better yield & quality, a low pressure reqd / no undesired product as majority escapes as H2S / product with high octane rating/ use of selective catalyst/ no external fuel needed as fuel comes from coal embedded in catalyst.
Knocking: In an internal-combustion engine, sharp sounds caused by premature combustion of part of the compressed air-fuel mixture in the cylinder.
In a properly functioning engine, the charge burns with the flame front progressing smoothly from the point of ignition across the combustion chamber.
However, at high compression ratios, depending on the composition of the fuel, some of the charge may spontaneously ignite ahead of the flame front and burn in an uncontrolled manner, producing intense high-frequency pressure waves.
These pressure waves force parts of the engine to vibrate, which produces an audible knock.
Compression ratio (CR) is the ratio of gaseous volume(V1) in the cylinder at the end of the suction-stroke to the volume(V2) at the end of compression -stroke of the piston.
As V2 < V1, CR = V1/V2 > 1.
The 'CR' at which the fuel tends to knock is known as 'critical compression ratio'.
Consequences: Knocking can cause overheating of the spark-plug points, erosion of the combustion chamber surface, and rough, inefficient operation.
It can be avoided by adjusting certain variables of engine design and operation, such as compression ratio and burning time; but the most common method is to burn gasoline of higher octane number.
Higher the octane number, the more compression from the piston the gasoline can withstand before igniting in the engine.
The ability for gasoline to withstand being compressed is most important for vehicles that run on traditional gasoline.
The octane number of gasoline is a measure of its resistance to knock.
The octane number is determined by comparing the characteristics of a gasoline to isooctane (2,2,4- trimethylpentane) and heptane.
Isooctane is assigned an octane number of 100.
It is a highly branched compound that burns smoothly, with little knock.
Octanerating canbe improved with octane boosters such as ethanol, di ethyl Telluride ,methanol, MTBE, ETBE (all oxygenated and somewhat safe) or other chemicals.
In the past it was usually TEL (lead based, which were banned in the mid-70's since they're toxic and also destroyed the car's catalytic converters).
Tetra ethyl Lead: (C2H5)2pb forms Pb and PbO particles which react as chain reaction inhibitors by slowing down the chain oxidation reaction responsible for early detonation leading to knocking sound.
1)Presence of 'S' reduces the efficiency of TEL .
So, desulphurised Gasoline is used.
2) Pb & PbO2 decrease engine life so these are removed as follows, Pb + C2H4Br2 → PbBr2 + C2H4, PbBr2 is volatile so escapes along with exhaust gas.
3) Another cause of pollution is incomplete combustion leading to the formation of CO X, NOX etc.
Hence catalytic convertors based on Pt are employed to carry out catalytic combustion reaction.
But lead present in exhaust gas poisons active sites in the catalyst.
Catalytic converter is a Pt or Rh based compound which helps to convert more poisonous CO to CO 2.
CO → CO2.
But Pt is poisoned by Pb, hence the need for unleaded petrol.
MTBE : It is preferred as it contains oxygen in the form of ether group and supplies oxygen for combustion there by reducing the formation of peroxy compound.
Its advantage is that it permits use of catalytic converter.
Octane numbers: o The octane number of a fuel is based on how fuels auto ignite, under compression.
o It is based on the scale where isooctane is 100 (minimal ignition under pressure) and heptane is 0 (easily ignites under pressure).
o For example, a petrol with an octane number of 92 has the same knock as a mixture of 92% isooctane and 8% heptane.
o Octane rating decreases with an increase in the carbon chain length.
o Octane ratings increase with carbon chain branching.
o Octane ratings increase in aromatics with same number of carbons.
o It is important to know octane numbers for petrol because the auto ignition of fuels causes a knocking effect in petrol engines.
This is where it ignites twice; once due to the high pressure and again when the spark ignites the petrol.
This causes the car engine to be less efficient and it can also damage the engine.
o However, diesel engines rely on this knocking effect, as they have no spark plugs and rely on the effect of compression to make their fuel/air mixtures ignite.
o Octane rating order is given in decreasing order as: n-alkanes > mono substituted alkanes> cyclic alkanes > alkenes > alkenes > poly substituted alkenes > aromatics.
Similarly for straight chain hydrocarbons, n-hexane > n-pentane > n-butane 'Octane Rating' was introduced by Graham Edger in 1872 which gave n-heptane with zero with iso octane 100.
The best gasoline known as 80-octane fuel is having 80:20 combination of iso octane & n-heptane.
How octane rating of a fuel can be increased?
o There are two ways to increase the octane number of a fuel.
One is to put special additives into the fuel which discourage auto ignition, and the other is to blend high- octane fuels in with the ordinary petrol.
The right kind of alkane: o The best kind of alkane for fuels is not the most plentiful in crude oil.
o The shorter the alkane chain, the higher the octane number.
However, the volatility of the hydrocarbon increases with a decrease in the chain length.
o The short alkane chains have to be mixed in petrol to lower their volatility and higher the octane number of the petrol.
o The other factor that affects the octane number is the degree of branching in the alkane chain.
The more branched the alkane is, the higher the octane number.
o Crude oil contains both straight-chain and branched alkanes, but it does not contain enough branched alkanes to give it a high octane number.
o But this can be solved by increasing the octane numbers by isomerism, reforming and cracking.
Isomerism o Isomerization involves heating up straight chained alkanes in the presence of suitable catalysts, so that the chains break.
o When the chains join together again, they are more likely to be branched.
o Oil refineries do this on a large scale with C6H14 and C5H12.
o The isomerization reaction is reversible and higher temperatures favour the production of straight chained isomers.
However the temperature cannot be too low or the reaction would take too long, so a compromise is made between yield and rate of reaction.
The temperature used is 250oC.
o The catalyst involved in the isomerization is platinum; the products are then passed over a form of zeolite, which acts as a molecular sieve, separating the straight chains from the branched chains.
Cetane Number OR Rating: It is a measure of the ignition value of a diesel fuel that represents the percentage by volume of cetane( Hexadecane,C16H34 ) in a mixture of liquid methylnaphthalene that gives the same ignition lag as the oil being tested.
Cetane is a colorless, liquid hydrocarbon (a molecule from the alkane series) that ignites easily under compression.
For this reason, it was given a base rating of 100 and is used as the standard measure of the performance of compression ignition fuels, such as diesel and biodiesel.
All the sundry hydrocarbon constituents of diesel fuel are measured and indexed against cetane's base-100 rating.
Cetane rating is given as: n-alkane > napthalenes > alkenes > branched alkanes > aromatics From Left to Right: Ignition delay increases, Ignition quality decreases, Cetane number decreases Cetane Number (Significance) Similar to the octane number rating that's applied to gasoline to rate its ignition stability, the cetane number is the rating assigned to diesel fuel to rate its combustion quality.
While gasoline's octane number signifies its ability to resist auto-ignition (also referred to as pre- ignition, knocking, pinging, or detonation), diesel's cetane number is a measure of the fuel's delay of ignition time (the amount of time between the injection of fuel into the combustion chamber and the actual start of combustion of the fuel charge).
Because diesel engines rely on compression ignition (no spark), the fuel must be able to auto- ignite-and generally, the quicker the better.
A higher cetane number means a shorter ignition delay time and more complete combustion of the fuel charge in the combustion chamber.
This, of course, translates into a smoother running, better performing engine.
Cetane number requirements depend mainly on engine design, size, speed of operation, and load variations-and to a slightly lesser extent, atmospheric conditions.
Conversely, running a diesel engine on fuel with a lower-than-recommended cetane number can result in rough operation (noise and vibration), low power output, excessive deposits and wear, and hard starting.
Cetane Numbers of Various Diesel Fuels: Normal modern highway diesel engines run best with a fuel rated between 45 and 55.
The following list of cetane numbers denotes varying grades and types of compression ignition diesel fuels: Regular diesel: 48 Premium diesel: 55 Biodiesel (B100): 55 Biodiesel blend (B20): 50 Synthetic diesel: 55 Commonly High speed diesel( 45-60), Low speed(~25).
Additives to raise cetane number : Alkyl nitrates (principally 2-ethylhexyl nitrate) and di- tert-butyl peroxide , acetone peroxide are used as additives to raise the cetane number.
Liquid Fuels: LPG: It is obtained as a by product during cracking of heavy oils or natural gas.
It is dehydrated, desulphurised & traces of odorous organic sulphides (Mercaptans) is added to give warnings of gas leak.
LPG is supplied under pressure in containers under various trade name.
Its calorific value is 27,800 Kcal/m3.
It consists of hydrocarbons of such volatility so that it can exist as gas under atmospheric pressure but can also be easily liquefied under pressure.
Mainly consists of n-butane,, isobutene, butylenes and propane with little or no amount of ethane and propylene.
Advantages over Gasoline: High knock-resistant, cheaper, burns cleanly where as disadvantages include its handling only under pressure with not being easily detectable.
Non-Petroleum Fuels: Mostly used as an alternative fuel.
Power Alcohol : Fuel containing 25% ethanol.
C12H22O11 + H2O → C6H12O6 + C6H12O6 (In presence of Invertase) C6H12O6 → 2C2H5OH + 2CO2(In presence of Zymase) The above process takes 36 to 38 hours for complete fermentation.
The fermented liquid(WASH) contains about 18-20% alcohol.
The wash is then fractionally distilled to get "Rectified Spirit"(90-95% alcohol).
To get absolute alcohol(100 %), the rectified spirit is digested with lime for 2 days and distilled.
Natural Gases: It is called 'Wet Gas' and it is processed to remove propane, propene, butane and butane.
When the gas is associated with crude oil, it is called 'dry gas'.
Approximate component of natural gas: CH4 = 70%, C2H6 = 5-10%, H2 =3%,(CO + CO2) = Rest, calorific value = 12000-14000 kcal/ m3 or (12500 kcal/kg.)
CNG : A natural gas compressed to a high pressure of about 1000 atm Say a steel cylinder containing 15 kg of CNG contains 2x104 or 20m3of natural gas at 1 atm.
pressure.
It is a good substitute for petrol or diesel as it gives no sulphur or nitrogen during combustion and no carbon particles.
Coal Gas: When coal is carbonized or heated in the absence of air at about 13000c, we get coal gas.
Coal → coke + coal gas Properties: It is a colourless gas having a characteristic odour.
It is lighter than air and burns with a long smoky flame.
Avg.
composition: H2 =40%, CH4 = 32%, CO =7%, C2H2=2%, C2H4 =4%, N2 =4%, CO2=1% and rest =4%.
Calorific value = 4,900Kcal/ m3 Uses; As a fuel/ In metallurgical operations for providing reducing atmosphere.
Oil Gas : Prepared by cracking of Kerosene oil in a coal-fixed furnace.
C12H26 → CH4+ C2H6+C2H2+ C2H4+ C3H8 Calorific value is 4500-5400 Kcal/ m3.
It is used as a laboratory gas with the composition, CH4 =25-30%, H2=50-55%, CO= 10-20%, CO2 = 3% Producer Gas: A mixture of combustible gases (CO + NO2) associated with a large amount of non-combustible gases like N2, CO2.
It is prepared bypassing air mixed with a little of steam over a red hot coal bed maintained at about 10000c in a special reactor, called 'Gas Producer'.
Calorific value =1300 Kcal/m3, Avg.
composition ; CO =22.3%, H2 =8.12%, N2= 52%, CO2 =3%.
Uses: Useful for heating in a furnace, muffle furnace, , retorts or as a reducing agent in metallurgical operation.
Water Gas: A mixture of combustible gases( CO2+ H2) with a little amount of non- combustible gases like CO2 and N2.
It is produced by passing alternatively steam and little air through a bed of red hot coal/ coke maintained at about 900-10000C in a reactor.
C +H2O → CO + H2 -29Kcal/mole Calorific Value = 2800 Kcal/m3 Avg.
composition : H2= 51%, CO=41%, N2 =4%, CO2 = 4% Uses; A source of H2, an illuminating gas, as a fuel also known as 'Blue Gas' Synthetic Fuel: A liquid or a gaseous fuel obtained from syn gas ( a mixture of CO & H2) where as Syn gas is derived from gasification of coal gas or biomass.
BATTERY SCIENCE: A battery is a device consisting of one or more electrochemical cells with external connections for powering electrical devices such as flashlights, mobile phones, and electric cars.
When a battery is supplying electric power, its positive terminal is the cathode and its negative terminal is the anode.
The terminal marked negative is the source of electrons that will flow through an external electric circuit to the positive terminal.
When a battery is connected to an external electric load, a redox reaction converts high-energy reactants to lower-energy products, and the free-energy difference is delivered to the external circuit as electrical energy.
Primary (single-use or "disposable") batteries are used once and discarded, as the electrode materials are irreversibly changed during discharge; a common example is the alkaline battery used for flashlights and a multitude of portable electronic devices.
Secondary (rechargeable) batteries can discharge and recharged multiple times using an applied electric current; the original composition of the electrodes can be restored by reverse current.
Examples include the lead-acid batteries used in vehicles and lithium- ion batteries used for portable electronics such as laptops and mobile phones.
DRY CELL: Dry cell or Leclanche cell is a primary cell having a zinc anode, a carbon (graphite) cathode surrounded by manganese dioxide, and a paste containing ammonium chloride as electrolyte.
The electromotive force (emf) produced by a dry cell is 1.5 V. Dry cell is not reversible and therefore have a limited life time.
Dry cell batteries create electrical energy by converting chemical energy into electricity.
These materials are placed within the electrolyte paste within the battery.
They react with each other through a chemical process in which the electrolyte (carbon or manganese dioxide) reacts with the zinc, creating electricity perating life.
Advantages of Leclanche' Battery 1.
The cost of this battery cell is quite low.
2.
Various shapes, sizes and capacities of these cells are easily available.
3.
Long traditional reliability.
Disadvantages of Leclanche' Battery 1.
Its energy density is quite low.
2.
It gives poor service in low temperature.
3.
It has poor leakage resistance.
4.
Cannot perform efficiently at high current drain application.
5.
Self-life is not very good.
6.
Its voltage falls steadily with discharge.
The overall reaction occurring in the dry cell produces 1.5 volts: anode Zn(s) Zn2+(aq) + 2e- cathode 2 e- + 2NH4+(aq) 2 NH3(g) + H2(g) 2 NH3(g) + Zn+2 (aq) [Zn(NH3)2]2+(aq) H2(g) + 2 MnO2(s) Mn2O3(s) + H2O(l) Zn(s) + 2NH4+(aq) + 2 MnO2(s) [Zn(NH3)2]2+(aq) + Mn2O3(s) + H2O(l) WET CELL BATTERY: There are huge chemical process is involved in Lead Acid battery's charging and discharging condition.
The diluted sulfuric acid H2SO4 molecules break into two parts when the acid dissolves.
It will create positive ions 2H+ and negative ions SO4-.
As we told before, two electrodes are connected as plates, Anode and Cathode.
Anode catches the negative ions and cathode attracts the positive ions.
This bonding in Anode and SO4- and Cathode with 2H+ interchange electrons and which is further react with the H2O or with the water (Diluted sulfuric acid, Sulfuric Acid + Water).
The battery has two states of chemical reaction, Charging and Discharging.
Discharging of a lead acid battery is again involved with chemical reactions.
The sulfuric acid is in the diluted form with typically 3:1 ratio with water and sulfuric acid.
When the loads are connected across the plates, the sulfuric acid again breaks into positive ions 2H+ and negative ions SO4.
The hydrogen ions react with the PbO2 and make PbO and water H2O.
PbO start reacting with the H2SO4 and creates PbSO4 and H2O.
On the other side SO4- ions exchange electrons from Pb, creating radical SO4 which further creates PbSO4 reacting with the Pb.
As explained above, following chemical reactions takes place at Anode and Cathode during the discharging process.
These reactions are exactly opposite of charging reactions: At cathode Pb + SO42- => PbSO4 + 2e- At anode: PbO2 + SO42- + 4H- + 2e- => PbSO4 + 2H2O Combining above two equation, the overall chemical reaction will be PbO2 + Pb + 2H2SO4 => 2PbSO4 + 2H2O Charging Reactions: When the battery is connected with the charger, the sulfuric acid molecules break into two ions, positive ions 2H+ and negative ions SO4-.
The hydrogen exchange electrons with the cathode and become hydrogen, this hydrogen reacts with the PbSO4 in cathode and form Sulfuric Acid (H2SO4) and Lead (Pb).
On the other hand, SO4- exchange electrons with anode and become radical SO4.
This SO4 reacts with PbSO4 of anode and create the lead peroxide PbO2 and sulfuric acid (H2SO4).
The energy gets stored by increasing the gravity of sulfuric acid and increasing the cell potential voltage.
As explained above, following chemical reactions takes place at Anode and Cathode during the charging process.
At cathode PbSO4 + 2e- => Pb + SO42- At anode PbSO4 + 2H2O => PbO2 + SO42- + 4H- + 2e- Combining above two equation, the overall chemical reaction will be 2PbSO4 + 2H2O => PbO2 + Pb + 2H2SO4 Lead-acid battery maintenance rules 1.
Watering is the most neglected maintenance feature of flooded lead-acid batteries.
As overcharging decreases water, we need to check it frequently.
Less water creates oxidation in plates and decreases the lifespan of the battery.
Add distilled or ionized water when needed.
2.
Check for the vents, they need to be perfected with rubber caps, often the rubber caps sticks with the holes too tightly.
3.
Recharge lead-acid batteries after each use.
A long period without recharging provides sulfating in the plates.
4.
Do not freeze the battery or charge it more than 49-degree centigrade.
In cold ambient batteries need to be fully charged as fully charge batteries safer than the empty batteries in respect of freezing.
5.
Do not deep discharge the battery less than 1.7V per cell.
6.
To store a lead acid battery, it needs to be completely charged then the electrolyte needs to be drained.
Then the battery will become dry and can be stored for a long time period.
FUEL CELL: Hydrogen + Oxygen = Electricity + Water Vapor Cathode: O2 + 4H+ + 4e- → 2H2O Anode: 2H2 → 4H+ + 4e- Overall: 2H2 + O2 → 2H2O A fuel cell is a device that converts chemical potential energy (energy stored in molecular bonds) into electrical energy.
A PEM (Proton Exchange Membrane) cell uses hydrogen gas (H2) and oxygen gas (O2) as fuel.
The products of the reaction in the cell are water, electricity, and heat.
This is a big improvement over internal combustion engines, coal burning power plants, and nuclear power plants, all of which produce harmful by-products.
Since O2 is readily available in the atmosphere, we only need to supply the fuel cell with H2 which can come from an electrolysis process (see Alkaline electrolysis or PEM electrolysis).
There are four basic elements of a PEM Fuel Cell: The anode, the negative post of the fuel cell, has several jobs.
It conducts the electrons that are freed from the hydrogen molecules so that they can be used in an external circuit.
It has channels etched into it that disperse the hydrogen gas equally over the surface of the catalyst.
The cathode, the positive post of the fuel cell, has channels etched into it that distribute the oxygen to the surface of the catalyst.
It also conducts the electrons back from the external circuit to the catalyst, where they can recombine with the hydrogen ions and oxygen to form water.
As the name implies, the heart of the cell is the proton exchange membrane.
It allows protons to pass through it virtually unimpeded, while electrons are blocked.
So, when the H2 hits the catalyst and splits into protons and electrons (remember, a proton is the same as an H+ ion) the protons go directly through to the cathode side, while the electrons are forced to travel through an external circuit.
Along the way they perform useful work, like lighting a bulb or driving a motor, before combining with the protons and O2 on the other side to produce water.
WORKING: Pressurized hydrogen gas (H2) entering the fuel cell on the anode side.
This gas is forced through the catalyst by the pressure.
When an H2 molecule comes in contact with the platinum on the catalyst, it splits into two H+ ions and two electrons (e-).
The electrons are conducted through the anode, where they make their way through the external circuit (doing useful work such as turning a motor) and return to the cathode side of the fuel cell.
Meanwhile, on the cathode side of the fuel cell, oxygen gas (O2) is being forced through the catalyst, where it forms two oxygen atoms.
Each of these atoms has a strong negative charge.
This negative charge attracts the two H+ ions through the membrane, where they combine with an oxygen atom and two of the electrons from the external circuit to form a water molecule (H2O).
Due to the high energetic content of hydrogen and high efficiency of fuel cells (55%), this great technology can be used in many applications like transport (cars, buses, forklifts, etc) and backup power to produce electricity during a failure of the electricity grid.
Advantages of the technology: By converting chemical potential energy directly into electrical energy, fuel cells avoid the "thermal bottleneck" (a consequence of the 2nd law of thermodynamics) and are thus inherently more efficient than combus By converting chemical potential energy directly into electrical energy, fuel cells avoid the "thermal bottleneck" (a consequence of the 2nd law of thermodynamics) and are thus inherently more efficient than combustion engines, which must first convert chemical potential energy into heat, and then mechanical work.
Direct emissions from a fuel cell vehicle are just water and a little heat.
This is a huge improvement over the internal combustion engine's litany of greenhouse gases.
Fuel cells have no moving parts.
They are thus much more reliable than traditional engines.
Hydrogen can be produced in an environmentally friendly manner, while oil extraction and refining is very damaging.
: NANOMATERIALS AND NANOCHEMISTRY It deals with the chemical application of nano materials along with their synthesis and characterization.
Nano materials are mostly in the range of 10-9 m .
Ex) Head of a pin--- 106 nm.
Effect of size on material properties : Property changes at nano scale wrt phisio-chemical, optical ,electrical and magnetic behavior.
1) Au nps change their colour by changing their size.
5 nm- red, 60nm -pink, 90 nm- violet.
2) A drop of water (5 nm ) boils at 95.90c compared to normal water.
3) Adhesive property increases by decreasing the size as surface area increases.
4) Anti bacterial property increases as size decreases.
5) Optical properties of nps are dependent on size.
All these changes in nps compared to the bulk materials are due to a large s/v ratio which is given by, S/V = 4∏r2/ 4/3∏r3 =3/r Materials with high s/v value possess very small diameter, porous and react with a much faster rate.
Extra chemical reactivity is due to this high S/ V ratio.
Synthesis of nano materials : Two common methods followed are 1) Top- down and 2) Bottom -up approach.
Top-down Approach : It is a solid-state process involving size reduction from bulk materials.
It mostly follows physical processes like crushing and grinding, milling.
Limitations : A slow process but not suitable for large scale applications/ leads to various defects and imperfections on the surface/ particles of uniform size and morphology not formed/ Some well known processes are electro-explosion, scattering, laser absorption Bottom-up Approach.
: It is purely a build-up one in which atom-by atom, molecule-molecule or cluster-cluster combination is made.
Some of these are : sol-gel, chemical reduction, combustion, chemical vapor deposition, microwave synthesis etc.
It also includes Green route which takes the help of sources like plants, yeast, fungi, bacteria etc.
Advantages: Generates particles of uniform size, shape, morphology./ particles of excellent quality and quantity/ an environmental friendly process Advantages of plant extract: Produces much less toxic waste/ act as both reducing and capping agent/ a safe process/ nps obtained have excellent medicinal properties.
Preparation of NPS : The three raw materials needed are given below.
1) Precursor salt ; AgNO3, AuCl3, ZnSO4,CuSO4 etc.
2) Reducing Agent : citric acid, H2O2, Hydrazine.
These are mostly phyto chemicals, plant metabolic, polyphenols.
3) Stabilizing agents : Also known as capping agents these are mostly polymers like PVA, PVP, surfactants.
The reducing agent provides electrons where as the capping agent makes the mixing process complete and faster.
Synthesis and characterization of gold nps : IMP) It is an environment friendly, low-cost and effective process.
The phyto chemicals ( Alkaloids, flavonoids) present in plant extract can act both as capping and reducing agent.
Synthesis: It is a bio reduction process in which leaves of Papaya and Tulasi are cut into small pieces.
10 gm of such leaves taken in a beaker with 200ml of distilled water was boiled for 30 minutes.
Then it was cooled and filtered through 0.45mm membrane filter.
Then the precursor salt is prepared by taking 20 mg of Gold(iii) chloride in 5 ml of distilled water.
For the preparation of gold nps, 20 ml of plant extract was taken in a beaker and placed in a hot magnetic stirrer at 400c.
Then 1 ml of gold salt was added to it drop wise.
The solution turned pink indicating gold nps.
Au3+ + 3e- → Au0 Characterisation: UV-Visible Analysis : The absorption spectrum shows formation of Au as it shows a surface Plasmon resonance (SPR ) band at550nm.
Plasmons are sub particles arising out of quantization of plasma oscillations.
SPR results from the resonant oscillation of free electrons at the interface between positive and negative permittivity mutually stimulated by light.
It is otherwise a manifestation of a coherent oscillation of conduction band electrons.
X-ray diffraction study : XRD pattern shows the production of Au nps by the reduction of Au3+ to Au .
It identifies the crystallographic nature of nps.
The peak (111) at 2ѳ= 38o shows nps with fcc structure.
Calculating the crystalline size ( d) using Debye-Scheres equation, d =0.94λ /βcos ѳ ≈ 15nm = K λ /βcos ѳ ,K≈ 1, ѳ = Bragg angle or diffraction angle Synthesis, characterization and application of Ag nps : 1) Preparation of plant extract : 20 gm of finely divided NEEM leaves were boiled with100 ml of double distilled water for 30 minutes.
It was then filtered using a 0.45mm membrane filter to get the extract.
2) Preparation of AgNO3 solution: Suitable amount of AgNO3 salt was added to double distilled water to prepare 10 ml of the solution after boiling.
3)Synthesis of Ag np ; 5 ml of extract was taken inside a 50 ml beaker and placed in a magnetic stirrer.
Then 1 ml of above salt solution was added to it drop wise using a micropipette.
The colour suddenly changed to yellowish brown indicating formation of nps.
Ag+ + e- ----→ Ag Characterisation : The sample was characterized using uv-vis spectroscopy and x-ray diffraction study.
UV-VIS study : The absorption maxima found at 400nm indicates formation of AgNO3 nps.
XRD STUDY: It provides information about the crystalline nature and size of nps.
The peak at 2ѳ =380 corresponds to(111) plane of nps and reveals fcc structure of silver nps.
The size of nps can be calculated by Debye-Scherer equation, d = 0.94λ/β cos ɵ ≈13nm ( β = 0.001 - 0.02) Application: Food packaging, cosmetic industry, bio-sensors, catalysis, coating materials, textile industry.
DISCLAIMER: The courseware material prepared may contain some text, figures and diagrams taken from google images and other readily available web sources.
The contents are prepared for the use of students in Silicon Institute of Technology as additional reference material, and not for any commercial purpose.
Engineering Economics Courseware Material SiliconTech Silicon Institute of Technology Prepared by The Special Academic Group Autonomy (SAGA) FOREWORD This is the third iteration of our own courseware material prepared by the members of SAGA, the special academic group, autonomy.
The contents have been carefully developed according to the autonomous syllabus, and should augment material presented during lectures; it is hoped that it will be useful for the students and serve as a ready reference for faculty members.
This year-long task was aimed at preparing contents for all second year subjects of the autonomous B.Tech.
curriculum.
The subjects included are Mathematics III for Electric Sciences, Mathematics III for Computer Sciences, Mathematics IV for Electrical Sciences, Circuit Theory, Analog Electronic Circuits, Digital Electronic Circuits, Signals and Systems, Basics of Instrumentation, Measurements and Instrumentation, Transducers and Measurements, Electrical Machines, Control Systems Engineering, Basics of Mechanical Engineering, OOP using Java, Design and Analysis of Algorithms, Database Management Systems, Computer Organization and Architecture, Engineering Economics, Biology for Engineers and Universal Human Values & Professional Ethics.
Faculty members from all the departments contributed to task in a year-long sustained effort.
They are, in no particular order, Susmita Biswal, Tusar Parida, Swarupa Roy, Dhananjaya Tripathy, Sanghamitra Das, Biranchi Rath, Amulya Roul, Satyabrata Das, Narayan Nayak, Sudhansu Biswal, Debangana Das, Tapas Maji, Anita Mohanty, Pratap Chandra Mohanty, Nivedita Pati, Ipsita Das, Manas Ranjan Singh, Subhashree Prusty, Samaleswari Nayak, Soumya Ranjan Dash, Bikram Misra, Sanjeev Dash, Tarini Mishra, Mahendra Agasty, Janmejay Senapati, Kumari Anamika and Rupa Kanungo.
Then entire group worked tirelessly and diligently throughout the year to get the task successfully completed.
Sincere thanks to the group for a job well done.
I am hopeful that these contents will come in handy and will be extensively used.
They are meant as additional resources to complement classroom teaching.
If there are any errors, I would be grateful if they are brought to my notice so that we can correct them in future editions.
Dr. Jaideep Talukdar, Principal Silicon Institute of Technology, Bhubaneswar August 2023 Engineering Economics B.Tech (4th Sem (CSE,CST & CEN) & 5th Sem(ECE,EEE,E & I) Objectives of the course The objective of this course is to familiarize the students with elementary principles of economics, provide the tools needed for analysing time value of money in engineering decision making, profit/revenue data, and make economic analysis for projects and alternatives.
Engineering Economics-its meaning and importance, Basic problems of an economy.
The concept of time value of money; Concept of Interest.
Time value of equivalence, Compound interest factors; Cash flow diagrams, Calculation of time value of equivalence, Present worth comparison, Future worth comparison, Pay- back period comparison.
What is Economics?
Economics is one of the oldest disciplines among the humanities and is categorized as a social science.
Economics examines and analyse the economic activity of people in order to satisfy their needs and desires.
Human wants are the starting point of economic activities and provide the basis for economics.
Human wants are unlimited but resources are limited.
Economics help us to allocate limited resources on unlimited wants.
As the resources are limited all the economies in the world have three basic problems.
They are What to produce?
How to Produce?
Whom to Produce?
Economics help us in solving three basic problems of an economy Engineering Economics Engineering Economics deals with criteria, factors and mathematical technique to make economic comparisons and decisions An engineering economist draws upon the accumulated knowledge of engineering and economics to identify alternative uses of limited resources and to select the preferred course of action.
Engineering has two aspects, one aspect concern itself with materials and physical forces of nature, the other is related to satisfying people's wants.
Thus, engineering is closely associated with the subject of economics.
It is because the chief action of the economics is to satisfy human wants with limited resources.
Engineering is the conscious application of science to the problem of economic production.
The term engineering economy embraces the consideration of human desires and the cost of satisfying them.
Today's engineers are not only planner and builders they are problem solver and decision maker.
Engineering economics help us in problem solving and decision making An engineer encounter number of problems while working.
Economics help them to solve all the problems.
(a) Which one of the competing designs should be selected?
(b) Whether the machines in which he is working should be replaced or not.
(c) How many units should be produced?
(d) With limited resources which alternative should be preferred.
(e) Are the benefits expected from a public service project large enough to make its implementation costs acceptable?
Before 1940, Engineers were mainly concerned with the design, construction and operation of machines, structures and processes.
They gave less attention to the resources, human and physical that produced the final products.
But today engineers not only generate novel technological solutions but also make skilful financial analysis of the effects of implementation.
Most definition of engineering suggest that the mission of engineers is to transform the resources of nature for the benefit of human race.
The type of resources susceptible to engineering enrichment include everything from ores and crops to information and energy.
A growing awareness of the finite limits of the earth's resources has added a pressing dimension to engineering evaluations.
The focus on scarce resources weds engineering to economics.
So the relation of engineering to economics can be looked to that of engineering to physics.
Origins of Engineering economy Comparison of alternative and cost consideration are two fundamental aspects of engineering economics which have a long history.
But the development of engineering economy methodology, which is now used in nearly all engineering work, is relatively recent.
This does not mean that, historically cost were usually overlooked in engineering decisions.
However, the prospective that ultimate economy is primary concern to the engineer and the availability of sound technique to address this concern differentiate this aspect of modern engineering practice from that of the past.
The credit goes to author M. Wellington a civil engineer, who in the later part of the 19th century specifically addressed the role of economics analysis in engineering projects.
His particular area of interest was rail road building in the United States.
This early work was followed by other contributions in which the emphasis was on techniques that depended primarily on financial and actuarial mathematics.
In 1930, Eugene Grant published 'principles of engineering economy'.
This was a milestone in the development of engineering economy as we know it today.
He placed emphasis on developing an economic point of view in engineering and "his point of view involves a realisation that quite as definite a body of principles governs the economic aspects of an engineering decision as govern its physical aspects".
His many contributions resulted in the recognition that "Eugene L. Grant can truthfully be called the father of engineering economy".
Modern approaches to discounted cash flow and capital rationing were influenced by the work of Joel Dean.
He incorporated the theories of Keynes and other economist to develop ways to analyse the effects of supply and demand for investment funds in allocating resources.
Current developments are pushing the functions of engineering economics to encompass new methods of risk, sensitivity and intangible analysis.
Principles of Engineering Economy The development study and application of any discipline must begin with a basic foundation.
We define the foundation for engineering economy to be a set of principles or fundamental concepts, that provide a comprehensive doctrine for developing the methodology.
Basically, there are seven principles which are shown below: Principle 1: Develop the alternatives The choice (decision) is among alternatives.
The alternatives to be identified and then defined for subsequent analysis.
A decision situation involves making a choice among two or more alternative.
Developing and defining the alternatives for directed evaluation important because of the resulting impact on the quality of the decision.
Engineers and managers should place a high priority on these responsibilities.
Principle 2: Focus on the differences Only the difference in expected future outcomes among the alternatives are relevant to their comparison and should be considered in the decision.
If all prospective outcomes of the feasible alternatives were exactly the same, there would be no basis or need for comparison.
We would be indifferent among the alternatives that could make a decision using a random selection.
Principle 3: Use a consistent viewpoint The prospective outcomes of the alternatives, economic and other, should be consistently developed from a defined viewpoint (perspective).
It is important that the viewpoint for the particular decision be first defined and then used consistently in the description, analysis and comparison of the alternative.
Principle 4: Use a common unit of measure Using a common unit of measurement to enumerate as many of the prospective outcomes as possible will make easier the analysis and comparison of the alternatives.
Principle 5.
Consider all relevant criteria Selection of a preferred alternative (decision making) requires the used of a criterion (or several criteria).
The decision process should consider both the outcomes enumerated in the monetary unit and those expressed in some other unit of measurement made explicit in a descriptive manner.
Principle 6: Make uncertainly explicit Uncertainly is inherent in projecting (or estimating) the future outcomes of the alternatives and should be recognized in their analysis and comparison.
Principle 7: Revisit your decisions Improved decision-making results from an adoptive process, to the extent practicable the initial projected outcomes of the selected alternative should be subsequently compared with actual results achieved.
A sound engineering economic analysis procedure incorporates the basic procedure and involves several steps.
There are 7 steps to economic analysis procedure.
Step: 1.
Problem recognition, definition and evaluation.
2.
Development of the feasible alternatives 3.
Development of the cash flow for each alternative.
4.
Selection of criteria 5.
Analysis and comparison of the alternatives.
6.
Selection of the preferred alternative.
7.
Performance monitoring and post evaluation results.
There are also six engineering design process which provides information to related steps in the economic analysis procedure.
Engineering design process Activities Step 1 1.
Problem/need definition.
2.
Problem/need formulation and evaluations.
3.
Synthesis of possible solutions calculations (Step 2) 4.
Analysis optimization and evaluation (Step 3, 4, 5).
5.
Specification of preferred alternative (Step 6) 6.
Communication (Step 7) The applicability of engineering economics is discussed in detail in different chapters of the book.
Time Value of Money Money has a time value.
The simplest explanation of the time value of money is that a rupee in your hot little fist today is worth more than the promise of a rupee tomorrow or at any time in the future and its worth less than the rupee you had yesterday or any time in the past.
The time value of money seems like a sophisticated concept, yet it is one that we grapple with every day..
The idea that money available at the present time is worth more than the same amount in the future, due to its time value.
Money has time value because of two important reasons: 1.
Earning power of money 2.
Purchasing power of money Earning Power of Money Time value of money is the idea that money that is available at the present time is worth more than the same amount in the future, due to its potential earning capacity.
In simpler terms, it would be safe to say that a dollar was worth more yesterday than today and a dollar today is worth more than a dollar tomorrow.
Money earns money as time advances The amount of money increases because of earning power Purchasing Power Money has purchasing power As purchasing power of money changes due to change in price level, value of money changes At the time of inflation value of money falls and at the time of deflation value of money rises Concept of Interest Interest is manifestation of time value of money.
It is the amount we owe using someone else's money.
In other words, it is the amount someone pays for using your money Why interest is charged?
Interest is charged because of the following reasons Money has time value Interest is charged by the lender for risk of non-payment is a price for sacrifice of present consumption and waiting.
From the borrower's point of view interest is given because a loan is both an obligation and opportunity Calculation of Interest Interest can be calculated in two ways: Simple Interest Compound Interest Simple Interest: In case of simple interest, interest earned is directlyproportional to the capital involved in loan.
Simple interest is earned on the beginning principal.
Simple Interest: I = P iN P = Present amount or principal amount i = Interest Rate N = Number of interest period.
F = P+I F= P + PiN F= P(1+iN) F= Future amount Ex: P =100, i = 10%, N=2 F = 100[ 1 + (0.10 × 2) ]= 120 When N is not a full year, there are two ways to calculate simple interest earned during the period of the load When ordinary simple interest is used, the year is divided in to twelve 30-day periods In exact simple interest, a year has precisely the calendar number of days, and N is the fraction of the number of days the loan is in effect that year Example: P =100 i= 10% N= 2months (January, Feb) Ordinary Simple interest: F = 100 [1 + (0.10 × 2/12)] Exact Simple interest: F =             365 28 31 10 .
0 1 100 Compound Interest It is good to receive compound interest, but not so good to pay.
interest is calculated not only on the beginning principal, but on any interest accumulated in the mean time Example: P= 100 i = 10% , N = 2           N N i P F i P i i i P i Pi P Pi P F rate erest due erest year plus borrowed amount erest year borrowed amount years two in due Amount Compound                1 1 1 int int 1 int 1 2 2 2 Nominal Interest rate Generally, interest rates are quoted on annual basis.
But sometimes interest rates may be compounded number of times, like monthly, quarterly and semi-annually For an example if the amount is compounded semi-annually there will be two compounding period.
With interest rate of 5% for each half is typically called 10% compounded semi-annually The nominal interest rate is base rate without the compounding effect.
Example: P =1000 i = 12 % Effective Interest rate The effective annual interest rate is simply the ratio of the interest charged for 1 year to the principal.
In other words, effective interest rate is the rate of interest which include the compounding effect of interest on interest     % 8.
18 1 2 18 .0 1 int % 6.
19 1000 1000 1196 % 8.
18 1000 1000 1188 1196 015 .0 1 1000 1188 09 .0 1 1000 int % 18 1000 : 1 1 int 2 12 2                               eff eff eff N N m eff i principal the to reference without obtained be can erest annual Effective i i F F Monthly annually Semi compounded is amount the if rate erest effective Calculate i P Ex m r i P P F rate erest Effective Continuous Compounding 1 1 lim        m m eff m r i  Time value of Equivalence If two and more situations are to be compared their characteristics must be placed on an equivalent basis.
Which is worth more, 4 kg of product A or 500 gms of product 2 A .
To answer this question, it is necessary to place the two amounts on an equivalent basis by use of the proper conversion factor.
After conversion of kg to grams, the question becomes, which is worth more, 4 kg of product A or 500 gms of product 2 A Two things are said to be equivalent when they have the same effect.
Three elements are involved in the equivalence of series of money.
These are (a) The amounts of the sums (b) The times of occurrence of the sums and (c) The interest rate.
As interest formula, consider time and interest rate, thus they are convenient means of calculating the equivalence of monetary amounts occurring at different points in time.
The relative merit of two or more alternative is usually not directly apparent from a simple statement of their future receipts and disbursement.
These amounts must be placed on an equivalent basis.
Suppose an engineer sells his patent to a corporation and offered a choice of Rs 12,500 now and Rs 2,000 per year for the next 10 years.
End of Year Receipt from A (Rs.)
Receipt from B(Rs.)
0 12500 1 2000 2 2000 3 2000 4 2000 5 2000 6 2000 7 2000 8 2000 9 2000 10 2000 Total 12500 20000 From the above example it is not right to say that alternate B is desirable as we get more from alternative B than A.
The statement will be correct only when the interest rate is zero.
So both of the figure should be brought to common platform.
Rate of interest being 10% an equivalent value for alternative B is to calculate an amount at the present that is equivalent to 10 receipts of 2,000 each.
In the above example we can compare both the option by braining them to a common base.
12500(A/P,10,10)=2034.75 2000 (P/A,10,10) = 12289.14 Either we can convert the single value to series of values Or we can convert series of values to single value Series can be compared with series Single present value can be compared with single present value Single future values can be compared with single future values Cash-Flow Diagrams The cash 'flow is the actual inflow (receipts) and outflow (disbursements) at different points in time that occur over the life of an investment.
To aid in identifying and recording the economic effects of investment alternative, a graphical description of each alternatives cash transaction may be used.
This graphical descriptor, referred to as a cash flow diagram will provide the information necessary for analyzing an investment proposal.
Problems involving time value of money can be represented in a graphic form with the help of cash-flow diagram.
Cash-flow diagrams represent time by a horizontal scale marked off with the number of interest period specified.
The cash flow over time are represented by arrows of relevant period.
Upward arrows represent positive flows( receipts) and down ward arrows represent negative flows( disbursements).Two or more receipts or disbursements made at the same time are summed up and presented in a single arrow.
This single arrow generally represents the net cash flows.
The length of the arrows can also suggest the relative values of particular cash flow.
Compound Interest Factors There are 8 conversion factors.
They are called as compound-interest factors.
Some conversion factors help us in converting single value to single value and some conversion factors help in converting single value to series of values.
Compound amount Factor (single value to single value): Example: If you deposit Rs.
100 in your bank account today at an interest rate of 10% , what amount you will withdraw from the bank after two years P= 100 i =10% , N= 2 F = ?
F = P(F/P,10%,2) = 100 (F/P, 10% ,2) = 100 (1.2100) = 121 Present-worth Factor (single value to single value): Ex: If you want to have Rs.
121 in your bank account after two years at 10 interest rate, what amount you will deposit today F=121 , i = 10% , N=2 , P =?
P = F(P/F,10%, 2) P= 121 (0.82645) = 100 Sinking-Fund Factor (A/F , i, N) (Single future to series) What is sinking-Fund?
A fund established to accumulate a given future amount through the collection of uniform series of payments is called a sinking fund.
Each payment has a constant value A is made at the end of an interest period Use: To find A, given F. Symbols: (A /F, i%, N) Formula: A = F(i/[1 + i)N-1]) =F(A/F, i, N) N-1 Endof timeperiod A is called Annuity Annuity is a series of payments having three important characteristics Series of uniform payments Uniform time gap The payments are made at the end of the period Annuity due is also a series of payments having uniform time gap and uniform payments , but the payments are made at the beginning of the period rather than the end of the period.
Example: You want to have Rs.
50,000 in your bank account after five years, If the prevailing interest rate is 10 percent compounded annually what amount you will deposit at the end of each year?
F = 50,000 , i = 10% , N=5 , A= A= F(A/F, 10%, 5) =50,000(0.16380) = 8190 Series-compound amount factor(F/A ,i, N) (Series to single Future) Example: You decided today to make a deposit of Rs.
8190 in a bank at the end of each year for coming 5 years.
If the prevailing interest rate is 10 % compounded annually, what amount you will withdraw at the end of the 5 th Year?
A= 8190 , i = 10% , N= 5 , F = ?
F= 8190 (F/A,10, 5) = 8190 (6.10610) = 50,000 Capital-Recovery factor(A/P,i,N) (Single Present to series) The capital-recovery factor is used to determine the amount of each future annuity payment required to dissipate a given present value when the interest rate and number of payments are known Example: A company has borrowed Rs.200,000 to purchase equipment.
The loan carries an interest rate of 5% per year and is to be repaid in equal installments over the next 7 years.
What is the amount of the annual installment Solution: P= 200000 , i= 5% N=7 A=?
200000 (A/P,5,7) = 200000(0.1728) = 34560 Series-Present-worth factor (P/A,i,N) (Series to single present) Example: A working woman is planning for her retired life.
She has 20 more years of service.
She would like to have an annual equivalent amount of Rs.
3, 00,000 starting from the end of the first year of her retirement.
Find the single amount that should be deposited now so that she receives the above mentioned annual equivalent amount at the end of every year for 20 years after her retirement.
Assume i = 15 %, compounded annually.
A = Rs.
3,00,000, i= 15%, N= 20, Find P =?
P = A(P/A,i, N) P = 3,00,000 (P/A,15,20) P = 3,00,000 (6.25933) P = Rs.
187779 Arithmatic Gradient to Annuity Conversion( A/G,i, N) The series may be Increasing gradient or Decreasing gradient.
In both cases the series may be converted to annuities A = A' + G (A/G, i, N) A= A' - G (A/G, i, N) Example A person is planning for his retired life.
He has 10 more years of service.
He would like to deposit 20% of his salary, which is Rs.
10,000 at the end of the first year and thereafter he wishes to deposit the same amount (Rs.10,000) with an annual increase of Rs.
2,000 for the next 9 years with an interest rate of 20%.
Find what equivalent annual series of income it will create and also find the total amount at the end of the 10th year of the above series.
A' = 10,000, G = 2000, N=10, i = 20%, A =?
F= ?
A = A' + G (A/G,20,10) A = 10,000 + 2000 (3.07386) =10,000 + 6147.72 = 16147.72 F = 16147.72(F/A,20,10) = 16147.72(25.95868) = 419173.4962 Calculation of time-vlaue of equivlance Unknown interest rate Ex: At what interest rate Rs.
10,000 invested today will be equivalent to Rs.
30,000 after 10 years.
Given P= 10,000, F= 30,000 n= 10 years Find I F= P(F/P, i , N) F/P= F/P, i,N 30000/10000= F/P, i,N 3= F/P, i, N Assuming i at 11%, (F/P,11,10) = 2.83942 Assuming i at 12%,(F/P,12,10) = 3.10586 Then by interpolation % 5.
11 83942 .2 10586 .3 83942 .2 3 01 .0 11 .0          i Present-worth of Annuity Due A series of payment made at the beginning instead of the end of each period is referred as annuity due.
In this case, calculation will be some bit of different from general annuity.
1.
The series should be divided in to two equal parts.
2.
First payment should be treated separately 3.
Remaining payment should follow the rule of general annuity calculation.
The present worth is the sum of the first payment plus the product of annuity and the series of present worth factor.
N will be number of payments minus 1.
Formula for annuity due = A + A ' (P/A, i, N) What is the present worth of a series of 5 year end payments of Rs 30000 each, when the first payment is due today and the interest rate is 10% P=30,000 (P/A,10,5) P= 30,000 + 30,000 (P/A,10,4) Present-worth of deferred Annuity Another pattern for a series of payments, in which the first payment does not begin until some date later than the end of the first period , is called a deferred annuity.
Ex: With interest rate of 10 percent, what is the worth on December 31,2020, of a series of year-end payments of Rs 50,000 made from the years 2023 through 2027.
P = 50,000 (P/A,10,5) (P/F,10,2) Multiple Payment Cash-flows (More compounding period than Payments) Today (2022) we decided to make three payments of Rs.
20,000 each in every two years.
The prevailing interest rate is 7 percent per year.
How large the will the bank account be in 2030.
Ans: FW= 20,000 (F/P,7,6) + 20,000 (F/P,7,4) + 20,000(F/P,7,2) Income & Outlay Initial cost = 1,00,00 Annual revenue = 30,000 Annual expenses = 5000 Salvage value= 40,000 i = 10% N= 5 Find present worth and future worth PW = -1,00,000 + 30,000(P/A,i, N) - 5000 (P/A,i,N) + 40,000 (P/F,i,N) PW = -1,00,000 + 30,000(P/A,10, 5) - 5000 (P/A,10,5) + 40,000 (P/F,10,5) PW = -1,00,000 + 25000 (P/A,10,5) + 40,000 (P/F,10,5) FW= -1,00,000(F/P,10,5) + 25000 (F/A,10,5) + 40,000 Problems with Solution Qn01.
The net income from a newly purchased piece of construction equipment is expected to be Rs 12,000 in the first year and to decrease by Rs.
1500 each year as maintenance cost increase.
The equipment will be used for four years.
What annual annuity will produce an equivalent income , when the interest rate is 8 percent.
Ans: Given; A' =12,000 G=1500 i=8% N=4 Find A A= A'-1500 (A/G,i,4) A= 12,000-1500(1.40396) =12,000-2105.94= 9894.06 Q No.
2.
The rights to patent have been sold under an agreement in which annual year-end of payments of Rs.
10,000 are to be made for the next ten years.
What is the current worth of the annuity at an interest rate of 7 percent.
Given: A=10,000 , i=7% N= 10, Find P P= 10,000 (P/A,7,10) P= 10,000(7.02358) =70235.8 Q No.
3.
A company deposits Rs.
20,000 in a bank at the end of every year for 10 years.
The company makes no deposit during the subsequent 5 years.
If the bank pays 8 percent interest, how much would be in the account at the end of 15 years.
20,000(F/A,8,10) (F/P,10,5) 20,000(14.48656)(2.15892) =625506.48 Q No.
4.
A company buys a machine for Rs.
1,20,000 which it agrees to pay for in 5 equal annual payments, beginning one year after the date of purchases, at an interest rate of 4 percent per annum.
Immediately after the second payment, the terms of agreement are changed to allow the balance due to be paid off in a single payment the next year.
What is the final single payment?
1,20,000 (A/P,4,5)= 120000(0.22463) =26955.6 P= 26955.6+ 26955 .6(P/A,4,2) = 26955.6+ 26955 .6(1.88609) =26955.6+50840.687=77796.287 Q No.
5.
You estimate you will need Rs.
1,00,000 per year for thirty years starting on your 65 th birthday to live on during your retirement.
Today is your 50 th birthday and you want to make equal deposits to an account paying 7 percent per year, the first deposit today and the last deposit on your 64 th birthday.
How much each deposit be?
1,00,00(P/A,7,30) 100000(12.40904) =1240904 1240904(A/F,7,15) 1240904(0.04434) =55021.683 Q No.
6.An engineer borrowed Rs.
3000 from the bank, payable in 6 equal end-of year payments at 8 percent.
The bank agreed to reduce the interest on the loan if interest rates declined before the loan was fully repaid.
At the end of 3 years, at the time of third payment, the bank agreed to reduce the interest rate from 8 percent to 7 percent on the remaining debt.
What was the amount of the equal annual end of year payments for each of the first 3 years?
What was the amount of the equal annual end-of -year payments for each of the last 3 years?
3000 (A/P,8,6) 3000 (0.21632) =648.96 648.96(P/A,8,3) 648.96(2.57710)=1672.434 1672.434(A/P,7,3) 1672.434(0.38105) =637.21 Q No.
7.A building site for new gasoline station was purchased 10 years ago for Rs.
50,000.
The site has been recently sold for Rs.1,20,000.
Disregarding any taxes, determine the rate of interest obtained on the initial investment.
Q No.
8.A person needs a sum of Rs.
2,00,000 for his daughter's marriage which will take place 15 years from now.
Find the amount of money that he should deposit now in a bank if the bank gives 18 percent interest, compounded annually.
F =2,00,000 i= 18% N= 15 P=?
P = 2,00,000 (P/F,18,15) 200000(0.0835) =16700 Q No.
9.
A sinking fund is created for the redemption of a loan of Rs.
50,000 at the end of 10 years.
How much money should be provided out of profits each year of the sinking fund, if the interest rate is 5% p.a.
F = 50,000 i= 5% A=?
N= 10 A= 50,000 (A/F,5,10) =50,000 (0.07950) = 3975 Present-worth Comparison There are different methods to compare engineering proposals like, present worth, Future-worth, equivalent annual worth, Rate of return Present worth comparison is the most widely used, utilized methods for making investment decisions Many economists prefer a present worth analysis because it reveals the sum in today's rupee that is equivalent to a future cash flow stream Conditions for present worth comparison (i) Cash flows are known - of course it is very difficult to know the future cash flow, but we have to anticipate these cash flows.
(ii) Cash flows are in constant rupees.
The buying power of money assumed to remain constant in the course of operation.
(iii) The interest rate is known.
There should not be different interest rate at different times.
(iv) Comparisons should be made before tax.
Inclusion of tax while comparing alternatives may be cumbersome.
(v) Comparison don't include intangibles: Intangibles are difficult to quantify.
The present worth of cash flow overtime is its value today.
There are two general patterns in present worth, the present worth equivalence and net present worth.
The former has investment in future while the latter has an investment at time '0' followed by possible receipts and disbursements at future time period.
Net - Present worth: In case of net present worth pattern we have investment in time period zero followed by series of receipts and disbursements.
Net Present Worth = PW (benefits) - PW (Cost) The basic procedure for applying the present worth criterion to a typical investment project:  Determine the interest rate that the firm wishes to earn on the investments.
The interest rate you determine represents the rate at which the firm can always invest money in investment pool.
The interest rate is often referred to as either a required rate of return or a minimum attractive rate of return (MARR).
Usually this selection is a policy decision made by the top management.
It may be possible for MARR to change over the life of the project, but for simplification purposes, we use a single rate of interest when calculating NPW.
 Estimate the service life of the project.
 Estimate the cash inflow for each period over the service life.
 Estimate the cash outflow over each service period  Determine the net cash flows (net cash flow=cash inflow-cash outflow) Find the present worth of each net cash flow at the MARR.
Add up these The formula is ) , , / ( 0 n i F P A PW N n n i    Where PW=NPW (Net present value calculated at i) An=Net cash flow at the end of period n i=MARR (Minimum attractive rate of return), or cost of the capital N= Service life of the project An will be positive if the corresponding period has a positive cash flow, and negative if there is a net cash outflow.
A positive NPW means that the equivalent worth of the inflows is greater than the equivalent worth of outflows, so the project makes a profit.
Therefore, if the PW(i) is positive for the single project, the project should be accepted, otherwise rejected.
The decision rule is; If PW(i)>0, accept the investment If PW=0, remain indifferent.
If PW(i)<0, reject the investment.
If there are more than one project and they are mutually exclusive, then select the project with highest NPW (net present worth).
Selection of single Proposal Example: An Investor can make three end-of-year payments of Rs.
50,000 , which are expected to generate receipts of Rs, 45,000 at the end of year 4 that will increase annually by Rs.10,000 for the following 4 years.
If the investor can earn a rate of return of 10 percent on other 8 year investments, is this alternative attractive Ans: PW = -50,000 (P/A,10,3) + [45,000 + 10000 (A/G,10,5)](P/A,10,5)(P/F,10,3) = -50,000 (2.48685) + [45,000 + 10000 (1.81013)](3.79079)(0.75131) =-124342.5 + [45,000 + 18101.3] (3.79079) (0.75131) =-124342.5 + 63101.3 (3.79079) (0.75131) =-124342.5 + 179716.189 =55363.689 The investment proposal is attractive Mutual Exclusive case (Comparison of assets having equal lives) Table A B Initial cost 2300 3200 Annual Expenses 250 0 Salvage Value 0 400 Life(N) 4 4 Rate of interest 15% 15% Ans: PW (A) = -2300 -250(P/A,15,4) = -2300 - 250 (2.85498) = -2300 -250 (2.85498) = -2300 - 713.745 = -3013.745 PW (B)= -3200 +400 (P/F,15,4) = -3200 +400 (0.49718) =-3200 + 198.872 = -3001.128 (Select) Mutual Exclusive case (Comparison of assets having un-equal lives) There are two prominent methods to compare the assets having unequal lives.
1.
Common-multiple Method (Repeated Life Method) In common multiple method we have to select one analysis period for comparing the assets (Common multiple of the lives of the asset involved) 2.
Study-period method (Shortest life span) Table A B Initial cost 2300 3200 Annual Expenses 250 0 Salvage Value 0 400 Life(N) 3 4 Rate of interest 15% 15% Common multiple method Cash-flow diagram PW (A)= -2300 -2300 (P/F,15,3) -2300 (P/F,15,6) -2300 (P/F,15,9) -250 (P/A,15,12) = -2300 -2300 (0.65752)- 2300 (0.43233)-2300 (0.28426)-250 (5.42062) = -6816 PW (B) = -3200 -2800 (P/F,15,4)-2800 (P/F,15,8)+ 400 (P/F,15,12) PW (B) = -3200 -2800 (P/F,15,4) -2800 (P/F,15,8) + 400 (P/F,15,12) = -3200 -2800 (0.57175) -2800 (0.32691)+ 400 (0.18691) =-5642 (Select) Study Period Method Incase of study period method we have to select a common period from both the assets for comparison, we assume we sell the asset at the end of the study period, which results in salvage value of the asset.
It may be very difficult to assume the salvage value at the end of the study period.
Suppose in this example, we assume the study period is 2 years having no salvage value PW (A) = -2300 -250(P/A,15,2) = -2300 -250(1.62571) =-2707 Pw (B) = -3200 In this case we select A, but the result contradict.
The reason is salvage value that was present in the original question.
Suppose now we want to bring back salvage value to B after two years and what should be the salvage of B, if we want to select B again 2707= 3200 -S(P/F,15,2) S = 3200-2707/P/F,15,2= 493/0.75614= 652 Comparison of Asset having infinite Lives There are some assets it is very difficult to determine their asset life particularly in case of dams, railway tunnels and of similar structure.
So in these cases comparison can be made by finding out the capitalised cost.
Capitalised cost is nothing but the sum of the first cost and the present worth of disbursements assumed to last forever.
Example: You are given Rs.
10,00,000 by your institute for the opening and upkeep of a music cell in your campus.
Annual maintenance of the music cell is expected to be Rs.
25,000.
You also need Rs.
1,00,00 in every 10 years for major equipment purchase.
How much will be left for the initial opening costs ,after funds are allocated for perpetual upkeep.
Future worth Comparisons Net present worth measures the surplus in an investment project at time 0.
The net future worth (NFW) measures this surplus at a time period other than 0.
Net future worth is a particularly useful investment situation         i nts disburseme P C C becomes formula the revenue no is there when nts disburseme and receipts annual between difference uniform the is A where i A P i A P i A P A P C C So i i A P is inity approaches N as N i A P of it The i i i N i A P know We i A P A Cost First Cost d Capitalise N N                         .
, .
1 ) , , / ( .
1 , , / inf ) , , / ( lim 1 1 1 1 , , / , , /     1429 .
539457 07 .0 32238 000 , 00 , 10 07 .0 7238 25000 000 , 00 , 10 07 .0 07238 .0 000 , 00 ,1 000 , 25 000 , 00 , 10 07 .0 10 ,7, / 000 , 00 ,1 000 , 25 1000000 cos               F A i nts disburseme Annual t d capitalise Cost First where we need to compute the equivalent worth of a project at the end of its investment period, rather than it's beginning.
For example it takes many years to build a nuclear power plant because of complexities of engineering designs and many time consuming regulatory requirements, so it would be better way to assess the value of this investment at the end of the investment period.
The formula is: ) , , / ( ) 1( ) ( 0 0 n N i P F A i A i FW N n n n N N n n          If FW (i)>0, accept the investment If FW (i)=0 remain indifferent to investment If FW (i)<0, reject the investment The calculation of future cash flow can be made by FW = pw(F/p,i,N) = pw(l + if More accurate results can be expected from future worth comparison than present worth comparison because of presence of inflation.
So it is necessary to know how many currency units must be available to meet future need.
So consequently future worth calculations are frequently utilized in escalation analyses, particularly for evaluating the effects of inflation.
The calculation of future cash flow can be made by FW = pw(F/p,i,N) = pw(l + if The decision basing on FW will give the some result as PW comparison.
Pay-back Period Comparison The pay-back method is otherwise known as the pay out method.
It is one of the simplest methods.
This method is generally considered in case of small investment.
It is used to obtain a rough estimate of the time that an investment will take to pay for itself.
It mainly indicates projects liquidity rather than its profitability.
Historically, the pay-back method has been used as a measure of projects risk ness, since liquidity deals with how fast an investment can be rewarded.
A low-valued payback period is considered desirable.
It is a basic method.
It can be classified in two categories: 1.
Conventional payback period method: The simplest method.
Ignores the time value of money 2.
Discounted payback period method: It includes the time value of money; it is more complex to conduct that method.
However, spreadsheet software can help us for these calculations.
For implementing payback period, the investor or the company specifies the maximum acceptable payback period.
If the payback period of the project is shorter than that, the project is accepted.
The payback method has some shortcomings.
It has been widely used till 1950's.
Because of the shortcomings, it should not be used as the only basis for the decision criteria.
The shorter the payback period, the more profitable the project is.
The formula for obtaining a rough measure of the time an investment takes to pay for itself is simple to use and understand.
Pay-back period = requiredinvestment Annualrecepits Annualdisbursement  = Firstcost Netannualsavings Example End of year A B C 0 - 1,000 - 1,000 -700 1 500 200 -300 2 300 300 500 3 200 500 500 4 200 1,000 0 5 200 2,000 0 6 200 4,000 0 Present worth i = 0 Payback period 3 years 3 years 3 years If we take time value of money into consideration and if the rate of interest is 15% Pw in different projects will be different.
Problems: Q NO.
1: If Utkal limited expects cash inflows from its investment proposal it has undertaken in time period zero, Rs 2,00,000 and Rs 1,50,000 for the first two years respectively and than expects annuity payment of Rs 1,00,000 for the next eight years, what would be the present value of cash inflows , assuming a ten percent rate of interest?
PW = 2,00,000 (P/F,10,1) +150000(P/F,10,2)+100000(P/A,10,8)(P/F,10,2) PW = 2,00,000 (0.90909) +150000(0.82645)+100000(5.33493)(0.82645) PW= 181818+123967.5+440905.289 PW=746690.789 Q No2.
Mr. Patnaik has ten more years of service.
He is planning for his retired life.
He would like to deposit Rs 8500 in the first year and thereafter he wants deposit the amount with an annual decrease of Rs 500 for the next 9 years with an interest rate of 15%.
Find the total amount at the end of 10th year of the above series A'= 8500, G=500, N=10, i=10% F=?
A= 8500-500 (A/G,10,10) = 8500 -500(3.72546) = 8500 -1862.73=6637.27 6637.27(F/A,10,10) = 6637.27(15.93742) = 105780.959 Q No.3: An investor has an option to purchase a tract of land that will be worth Rs.
10,000 in six years.
If the value of the land increases at 8% each year, how much should the investor be willing to pay now for this property?
F= 10000 , N=6 , i=8%, P= ?
P = 10000 (P/F,8,6) = 10000 (0.63017) =6301.7 QNO.
4: A proposed improvement in an assembly line will have an initial purchase and installation cost of Rs.
1, 75,000.
The annual maintenance cost will be Rs 6000; periodic overhauls once every three years excluding the last year of use, will cost Rs 11,500 each.
The improvement will have a useful life of 9 years at which time it will have no salvage value.
What is the present worth of the 9-year cost of the improvement at i = 8 percent.
PW (Cost) = 175000 + 11,500(P/F,8,3) +11500 (P/F,8,6) + 6000 (P/A,8,9) = 175000 + 11,500(0.79383) +11500 (0.63017) + 6000 (6.24689) = 175000 + 9129.045+7246.955 +37481.34 =228857.34 Q No5: A refinery company entered in to a contract for raw materials with an agreement to pay Rs 6,00,000 now and Rs 1,50,000 per year beginning at the end of the fifth year.
The contract was made for 10 years.
At the end of the third year, because of unexpected profits, the company requested that it will be allowed to make a lump sum payment in advance for the rest of the contract.
Both parties agreed that 7 percent compounded annually was a fair interest rate.
What was the amount of lump sum?
Ans: PW = 1,50,000 (P/A,7,6) (P/F,7,1) = 150000(4.10020)(0.93458) = 574794.737 Q No.
6: A company wants to set up a reserve which will help the company to have an annual equivalent amount of Rs 10,00,000 for the next 20 years towards employees welfare measures.
The reserves assumed to grow at the rate of 15 percent annually.
Find the single payment that must be made now as the reserve amount.
PW = 1000000(P/A,15,20) =1000000(6.25933) =6259330 Q No.7 Mrs. Sabitri Rao Invests a sum of Rs.
50,000 in a bank at a nominal rate of interest of 18% for 15 years.
The compounding is done half yearly.
Find the maturity amount.
P =50,000 i=9% N= 30 F = 50000 (F/P,9,30) 50000(66.21177) =3310588.5 Q No.
8: A company wants to buy a machine.
It has received two offers.
The details are as under A B Initial Cost Rs.
6,00,000 Rs.
8,00,000 Life Span 4 years 4 years Salvage Value Rs.
1,00,000 Rs.
1,00,000 Annual Maintenance Cost Rs.
50,000 0 At 10% interest rate, which offer should be selected.
Use Future worth Method.
FW (A)=-600000(F/P,10,4) +100000-50000(F/A,10,4) FW (A)=-600000(1.46410) +100000-50000(4.64100) FW (A) = -878460+ 100000-232050 FW(A)= -1010510 (Select) FW (B) = -800000 (F/P,10,4) +100000 FW (B) = -800000 (1.46410) +100000 FW (B) = -1071280 Q NO.
9 A marina has two alternative plan for constructing a small-boat landing on lake behind the sales building, one is a wooden dock and the other is a metal and concrete wharf.
Data for the two plans are as shown.
Using a minimum rate of return of 10 percent compare the present worth of the two plans.
Wood Metal-Concrete First Cost 35,000 55,000 Period before replacement 10 years 15 years Salvage Value 5000 0 Annual Maintenance 6000 3200 PW = -35,000 -30,000 (P/F,10,10) - 30,000(P/F,10,20) +5000(P/F,10,30)- 6000(P/A,10,30) PW(W) = -35,000 -30,000 (0.38554) - 30,000(0.14864) +5000(0.055731)- 6000(9.42691) PW(W) = -35,000 -11566.2 - 4459.3 +278.655-56561.46 PW= -107308.305 PW(M) = -55,000 -55,000(0.23939) -3200(9.42691) PW (M) = -55,000 -13166.45 -30166.112 PW(M)= -98332.562 (Select) Module II Equivalent annual worth comparison method, Situations for equivalent annual worth comparison, Rate of return, Internal rate of return, Incremental IRR analysis, Depreciation analysis, Methods of depreciation, Straight line method, Declining balance method, SOYD Method and MACRS method of depreciation; After tax comparison, Analysis of public Project, Cost-benefit analysis Equivalent annual worth comparison method Equivalent annual worth method is another important method for comparing engineering alternatives With an annual worth method, all the receipts and disbursements occurring over a period are converted to an equivalent uniform yearly payment Cost accounting procedures, depreciation, profit and loss are calculated annually.
These yearly cost tabulations generally make the annual worth method easier to apply and comprehend than the other comparison methods The annual worth calculation is derived from capital recovery factor as it converts a lump sum to an equivalent annuity PW= -P +A(P/A,i,N)+ S(P/F,i,N) FW= -P(F/P,i,N) + A(F/A,i,N)+S EAW= -P(A/P,I,N)+ A +S(A/F,I,N) The capital recovery factor (A/P, i, N) accounts for both the repayment of invested capital and the interest earned on the unrecovered portion of the investment.
Suppose an asset is purchased for 40,000, it has an expected life of 4 years.
The purchaser intends to recover the 40,000 investment over 4 years plus the interest the 40,000 would have earned if it had been invested elsewhere if an acceptable interest rate is 10% the series of equal payments that will return the capital plus interest is computed as Equivalent annual payment A = P (A/P, 10, 5) A= 40,000(A/P,10,4) = 12618.83 End of Period Capital not recovered by end of period Interest due on Unrecovered capital Amount of capital recovered Period capital recovery charge 0 40,000.00 1 31,381.17 4000 8618.83 12,618.83 2 21900.45 3138.12 9480.72 12,618.83 3 11,471.67 2190.05 10,428.79 12,618.83 4 0.00 1147.17 11471.67 12,618.83 10,475.33 40,000.00 50,475.33 When only the amount of unrecovered capital at a certain time is sought, it can be determined directly from the present worth of the remaining payments: Unrecovered capital (year 3)= A(P/A,10,1) =12618.83(0.90909)= 11471.65 Unrecovered capital (year 2)= 12618.83(P/A,10,2) =12618.83(1.73554)= 21,900.48 EAW & EAC EAW = Equivalent Annual worth Net Annual worth It has both positive cash and Negative cash flow EAC= Equivalent Annual worth Comparison When only the cost of the projects are given and we convert all the cost to equivalent annual amount, it.
is called equivalent annual cost.
EAC = P(A/P,i,N)- S(A/F,,i,N) EAC = (P-S)(A/P,i, N) + S(i)                                       i S N i P A S P i N i P A S N i P A P EAC N i F A i N i P A iii equation of side hand right the is which and i i to reduces which i i i i i i i i i i get we ii eq from i ng substracti Now iii i i N i F A ii i i i N i P A that know We i N i F A S N i P A P EAC N N N N N N N N N                                , , / , , / , , / ) , , / ( , , / 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ), ( ) ........( 1 1 , , / ) ( .......... 1 1 1 , , / ) ......( , , / , , / Example: Initial Cost 1,00,000 Salvage value= 20,000 i=10% N=4 EAC= 1,00,000(A/P,10,4) -20,000 (A/F,10,4) = 1,00,000(0.31547) -20,000 (0.21547) =31547 -4309.4 =27237.6 EAC= (1,00,000-20,000) (A/P,10,4) +20,000(0.10) EAC= (1,00,000-20,000) (0.31547) +20,000(0.10 EAC= 25237.6+2000 =27237.6 Situations for equivalent Annual worth Comparison Consolidation of Cash-Flows: The government of Odisha wanted to introduce a training programme to increase the efficiency of its employees.
The programme last 1 year, costs $2000 per month.
It is expected that in the first month the savings from the training programme will be $800 and should increase by $400 per month.
However, operational confusion and work interferences are expected to boost clerical costs by $1200 the first month, but this amount should subsequently decline in equal increments at the rate of $100 per month.
If the required return on money is 12 percent compounded monthly and there is a stipulation that the programme must pay for itself within 1 year, should the training be introduced.
EAW (Savings)= 800 +400 (A/G,1,12) = 800 +400 (5.36815)= 2947 EAW(Costs)= -2000-[1200-100(A/G,1,12)] =-3200 + 100(5.36815)= -2663 Equivalent net monthly cash flow= 2947-2663= 284 Recovery of Invested Capital (Will it pay off?)
Initial Cost : Rs.
1,00,000 Annual Revenue : 20,000 Annual Expenses: 5000 Salvage Value: 40,000 i= 8 percent N= 5 EAW= -1,00,000 (A/P,8,5) + 15,000 + 40,000(A/F,8,5) EAW = -1,00,000(0.25046) + 15,000 + 40,000(0.17046) =-25046 + 15,000 + 6818.4 = -3227.6 EAW= - [(1,00,000-20,000)(A/P,8,5) +20,000(0.10)]+15,000 Comparison of Net Annual Costs X Y Initial Cost 1,10,000 95,000 Investment in 5 th Year 50,000 - Investment in 10 th Year 75,000 - Annual Cost 5000 6000 Life 15 15 i 10 10 EAC (X) = 1,10,00 (A/P,10,15) + 50,000(P/F,10,5)(A/P,10,15) + 75,000 (P/F,10,10)(A/P,10,15) + 5000 EAC (X) = 1,10,00 (0.13147) + 50,000(1.61051)(0.13147) + 75,000 (0.38554)(0.13147) + 5000 EAC(X) = 14461.7 + 10586.687 + 3801.520 EAC(X) = 14461.7 + 10586.687 + 3801.520 =28849.907 EAC (Y) = 95,000 (A/P,10,15) + 6000 = 95,000 (0.13147) + 6000 =12489.65 + 6000 =18489.65 Consideration of Asset Life In time value mechanics N is simply the number of compounding period.
N has special meaning when it represents life of the asset.
The life of the asset can be defined as follows Ownership life: Service life (It is the period of time an asset kept in service).
It is the period of useful service from the time of purchase until disposal.
Accounting life: This is a life expectancy based primarily on book keeping and tax considerations.
Economic life: It is the time period that minimises the asset's total equivalent annual cost and maximizes its equivalent net annual income.
Consideration of Assets having unequal lives X Y Initial Cost 25000 30,000 AMC 2000 1000 N 4 8 i 10 10 EAC (X)= 25,000(A/P,10,4) + 2000 EAC (X)= 25,000(0.31547) + 2000 EAC= 7886.75 + 2000 =9886.75 EAC(Y)= 30,000 (A/P,10,8) + 1000 =30,000 (0.18744) +1000 =5623.2+1000 =6623.2 Repeated Life Method EAC(X) = 25000 (A/P,10,8) + 25000(P/F,10,4)(A/P,10,8)+ 2000 EAC(X) = 25000 (0.18744) + 25000(0.68301)(0.18744)+ 2000 EAC(X) = 4686 + 3200.584+ 2000 =9886.7 EAC(Y)= 30,000 (A/P,10,8)+ 1000 =6623.2 Problems: Q No1.
A company can purchase a piece of equipment for Rs 20,000 and sell it for Rs.
4000 at the end of 6 year service life, or it can lease the unit for the same period by making first-of-the year payments of Rs 3000.
Compare the equivalent annual cost of the alternatives, using an interest rate of 15 percent EAC (Purchase)= (20,000-4000)(A/P,15,6)+ 4000(0.15) = (20,000-4000)(0.26424)+ 4000(0.15) =4227.84+600 =4827.84 EAC (Lease)= [3000 +3000(P/A,15,5)](A/P,15,6) = [3000 +3000(3.35218)](0.26424) = [3000 +3000(3.35218)](0.26424) = [3000 +10056.54](0.26424) =3450.060 Q No2.
A stand by electric power generator was purchased 6 years ago for Rs 8000.
At that time it was expected that the equipment would be used for 15 years and would have a salvage value of 10 percent of the first cost.
The generator is no longer needed and is to be sold for Rs.
2500.
Using an interest rate of 15 percent determine the difference between the anticipated and actual equivalent annual capital cost.
EAC(Anticipation)=(8000-800)(A/P,15,15)+ 800(0.15) EAC(Anticipation)=(8000-800)(0.17102)+ 800(0.15) EAC(Anticipation)= 1231.344+120 =1351.344 EAC(Actual)= (8000-2500)(A/P,15,6) + 2500(0.15) EAC(Actual)-=(8000-2500)(0.26424) + 2500(0.15) EAC(Actual)=1453.32+375 =1828.32 Q No 3.
Laser beams are to be used on a major construction project to ensure the exact alignment of components.
Two types of laser alignment systems, with the cost shown below are suitable for the project.
__________________ IC system Rs.
UC system Rs.
First cost 5,000 3,2000 Salvage value 1,000 0 Annual operating cost 600 950 Additional taxes and insurance per year 180 0 If both the systems have a life of 4 years and the minimum rate of return is 15% which offers the lower equivalent annual cost.
(BPUT 2003) (MCA) IC system EAC: (P - S) (A/P, i,N) + S (i) + Annual operating cost + Annual taxes Rs.
(5,000 - 1,000) (A/P, 15, 4) + 1000 (0.15) + 600 + 180 Rs.
(4,000) (0.3503) + 1000 (0.15) + 780 1401.2 + 150 = 1551.2+ 780 = Rs.
2331.2 UC system EAC P (A/P, i, N) + operating cost 3,200 (A/P, 15, 4)+ 950 = 3,200 (0.3503) + 950 = Rs.
2071 UC system offers the lower equivalent annual cost, so it should be preferred.
Q No4.
A company receives two options for purchasing a copier machine for its office.
Option 1: Make a down payment of Rs.
30,000 and take delivery of the copier machine.
The remaining money is to be paid in 24 equal monthly installments of Rs.
4500 each.
Option: 2 Make a full payment of Rs.
1,00,000 and take delivery of the copier machine.
Suggest the best option for the company to buy the copier machine based on the equivalent method of comparison by assuming 12% interest rate, compounded annually EAC (Option I) =30,000(A/P,1,24) + 4500 =30,000 (0.04707) + 4500 =1412.1+4500 =5912.1 EAC (Option II) = 1,00,000 (A/P,1,24) 1,00,000 (0.04707) = 4707 Q No5.
Megabit Electronics is considering the purchase of a new programmable circuit tester in order to improve its product quality.
The equipment has a first cost of 85,000 and the salvage value is predicted to be 6000 after a service life of 5 years.
Maintenance and operating costs are expected to be 8000 in the first year of operation and to increase by Rs.
1500 per year for each additional year of use.
Using an interest rate of 10%, determine what annual saving must be obtained through the use of this equipment to make it economically justifiable.
Solution (P - S) (A/P, i, N) + 6000 (0.10) (85,000 - 6000) (A/P, 10, 5)+ 6000 (0.10) 20840.2 + (0.2638) = Rs.
21440.2 Annual maintenance operating test: 8000 + 1500 (A/G, 10, 5) 8000+1500(1.8101) = 8000 + 2715.15 = 10715.15 EAC = 21440.2 + 10715.15 = Rs.
35155.35 Q No6.
An industrial engineer is considering two robots for purchase by a fibre optic manufacturing company .
Robot (X) will have a first cost of Rs 85,000 and an annual operating cost is Rs 30,000 and a Rs 40,000 salvage .value..
Robot Y will have a first cost of Rs 97,000 and annual operating cost of Rs Rs 27,000 and a salvage value of 48,000.Which should be selected on the basis of Annual Worth comparison at an interest rate of 125 per year.
Use 3 year study period.
Solution.
Cash flow diagram of Robot (x) Cash flow diagram of Robot (Y) Robot (x) EAC = ( P-S ) (A/P,i,N) + S(i) = (85,000 - 40,000) (A/P, 12,3) + 40,000(0.12) = (85,000 - 40,000) (0.41635) + 40,000 (0.12) = 18735.75 + 4800 = 23535.75 Annual Maintenance cost is $30,000 So EAC = 23535.75 + 30,000 = Rs 53,535.75 Robot (Y) EAC = (P-S) (A/P, i, N) + S (i) = (97,000 - 48,000) (A/P, 12,3) + S (0.12) = (49,000) (0.41635) + 5760 = 20401.15 + 5760 = 26161.15 Annual Maintenance cost is $ 27,000 EAC = 26161.15 + 27,000 = 53161.15 Robot (x) will be selected, as its EAC is less Rate of Return The rate of return is a percentage that indicates the relative yield on different uses of capital.
Three rates of return appear frequently in engineering economy studies.
MARR (Minimum Acceptable Rate of Return): It is the rate set by an organization to designate the lowest level of return that makes an investment acceptable.
IRR (Internal Rate of Return): It is the rate on the unrecovered balance of the investment in a situation where the terminal balance is zero.
ERR (External rate of Return): It is the rate of return that is possible to obtain for an investment under current economic conditions.
The minimum acceptable rate of return, also known as the minimum alternative rate of return is a lower limit for investment acceptability set by organizations or individuals.
It is a device designed to make the best possible use of a limited reserves.
The MARR differs from organization to organization.
In case of Government organization the MARR is generally lower.
Whether the MARR should be lower or higher it depends upon risk factor and all related issue.
IRR (Internal Rate of Return) The Internal Rate of Return method is most widely used method for performing engineering economic analysis.
This method solves for the interest that equates the equivalent worth of an alternative's cash inflows (receipts or savings) to the equivalent worth of cash out flows (expenditures, including investment cost).
Equivalent worth may be computed with any of the three methods.
The resultant interest rate is termed as the internal rate of return.
5.2 Engineering Economics The IRR can be defined in other ways as well.
The internal rate of return can be calculated by equating the annual, present or future worth of cash flow to zero and solving for the rate that allows the equality.
Although both the EAW and FW approaches can be applied for the calculation of IRR, the rate of return is often defined in terms of present worth.
IRR is the interest rate at which present worth of the cash flow of a project is zero, or The rate which when employed in computing the present worth of all the costs and present worth of all returns will make them equal.
Determining the type of investment We can classify the investment project by counting the number of sign changes in its net cash flow sequence/ A change either "+" to "-" or "-" to "+"is counted as one sign change.
(We ignore zero cash flow change).
Then,  A simple (conventional) investment is one in which the initial cash flows are negative, and only one sign change occurs in the net cash flow series.
If the initial flows are positive, and only one sign change occurs in the subsequent net cash flows, they are referred as the simple borrowing cash flows.
 A non-simple (or non-conventional) investment is one in which more than one sign change occurs in the cash flow series.
Multiple i* occur only in non-simple investments Investment Classification Cash Flow Sign at period Investment Type 0 1 2 3 4 5 Simple - + + + + + Simple - - + + 0 + Non-simple - + - + + - Non-simple - + + - 0 + Computational method There are three practical solution methods that need to be discussed for calculation of the interest rate i*.
These methods are;  Direct solution method  Trial and error method  Computer solution method Direct solution method It is a very special case, it can be applied to only two flow transaction (an investment followed by a single future payment) or a project with a service life of 2 years of return, and we can seek a mathematical solution for determining the rate of return, or cash flows that involves the periodic equal payments till eternity.
Example 11.1 Consider the following sets of investment project Project Cash Flow n A B 0 -$100 -100 1 60 0 2 900 0 3 0 150 Calculate the i* for A and B using the direct solution method.
For project A, we have NPW=0= 100 *) 1( 900 *) 1( 60 2 1     i i Substituting *) 1( 1 i  = x we have 60x +900x2-100=0 Rearranging in the quadratic equation, we have + 900x2 + 60x - 100 = 0 Note that if we have an equation in the form of aX2 + bx + c = 0, the solution of the quadratic equation is a ac b b X 2 4 2     Using the quadratic equation ) 900 ( * 2 ) 100 ( * ) 900 ( * 4 ) 60 ( 60 2         x The first root is X1=30.16% Re-substituting we have 3016 .0 * 1 1  i i1*=231.565% The second root is X X2=-36.83% 3683 .0 * 1 1   i i2*=-371.496% Note that the interest rates smaller than -100% does not make sense at all, why?
The rate of return for Project A is amazing i*=231.565%, disregard second root.
For project B we have NPW=-100+150*(1+i)-3 (1+i)3=150/100 3 3 2 / 3 ) 1(  i I≈14.47% Trial and error method Now, the objective is to make an estimated guess for i*, and to find two values for i* in one of which NPW is negative, and the other one NPW is positive.
Than, we use linear interpolation to approximate i*.
This process is somewhat tedious and inefficient, and it does not work for non-simple investment, because NPW function is not in general, a monotonically decreasing function of interest rate.
For single investment projects, the decision rule is If IRR>MARR, accept the project If IRR=MARR, remain indifferent.
If IRR<MARR, reject the project Example: Initial Cost =Rs.
80,000/- Annual Revenue = Rs.1,500/- Annual Expenses = Rs.850/- Salvage value = Rs.1,50,000/- N = 5 years MARR = 13% Find IRR PW = - 80,000 + 650(P/A, i, 5) + 150000(P/F,i,5) = 0 Assuming i as 14% PW = 137 Assuming i as 15% PW = - 3244 .
10 By linear interpolation     (15 14)% 137 0 14% 14.04% 137.0 3244.10 IRR             Clues for IRR Calculation (i) To avoid unnecessary trial and error if we have a simple investment, it is suggested to sum the cash flows.
If we have negative total we should not go for the calculation of IRR.
If by putting PW(0) it came by negative the calculation should be avoided.
(ii) When the salvage value is close to 100% of the first cost, the net annuity divided the first cost give a close approximation to i that is A/P = i.
(iii) If most of the income is at year N and is about twice the initial outlay than i = 72/N.
(iv) If MARR is given that value can be assumed as i Comparison Assets (Mutual Exclusive Cases) Mutually Exclusive Alternative (IRR Misconception) The shortcoming of IRR method Suppose that we have two projects n A1 A2 0 -$1,000 -$5,000 1 2,000 7,000 IRR 100% 40% PW (10%) $818 $1,364  At MARR=10%, both project's IRR is greater than MARR, we are inclined to choose A1 since it has a higher IRR,  However, the PW says exactly opposite thing, choose A2 since it has a higher NPW.
Which project to choose?
Why?
We choose project A2, because it has a higher NPW.
Remember that, NPW, FW, or AE is an absolute (dollar) figure, but the IRR is a relative (percentage) measure, and IRR measure ignores the scale of the investment.
NPW, FW, or AE measure will select the A2, but comparison of IRRs would rank the smaller project higher, therefore selects A1, another approach referred to as incremental analysis is needed.
Incremental investment Analysis If you decide to invest in Option A1 you need to withdraw only $1,000 from your investment pool.
You can invest the remaining Rs4,000 at an interest rate of (i.e.
MARR) 10% elsewhere, and can get an interest of Rs400 at the end of first year.
Combined with a gain from Project A1, you will earn Rs2,400 at the end of first year.
So, calculating NPW, we have -1,000+2,400(P/F, 10%, 1) =Rs818 If you choose Option A2, you invest all of your $5,000 of your investment pool.
And you will get $7,000 at the end of first year.
The NPW of the A2 is -5,000+7,000(P/F, 10%, 1) =1,364.
Thinking about how the incremental method in IRR, an extra $4,000 invested in A2 will bring you (Rs7,000-2,000) = Rs5,000 more.
If you have stayed in A1, you will only get Rs400 out of 4,000 by not investing A2 since MARR is 10%, However, by switching to A2, you invest Rs 4,000 more, but get Rs5,000 at the end of first year, therefore your actual return is 125%, well above the MARR so this is the reason why you have chosen A2 Therefore, to bring an incremental IRR analysis, we need to calculate (IRR), you sort the projects according to initial investment amount (in ascending order), and name the first project A, and the second one as B, and based on the differences of the investment and revenues, calculate IRRB-A The decision rule is If IRRB-A>MARR select B If IRRB-A=MARR, select either one If IRRB-A<MARR select A If a do-nothing alternative is allowed, the smaller cost option must be profitable (its IRR must be greater than MARR) .
This means that you compute the rate of return for each alternative in each mutually exclusive group, and then eliminate alternatives whose IRRs are less than MARR before applying the incremental analysis.
N X Y X - Y 0 -1000 -1000 0 1 100 1000 -900 2 350 200 150 3 600 200 400 4 850 200 650 MARR = 10% PW(x) = - 1000 + [100 + 250(A/G,10, 4)] (P/A, 10,4) PW(Y) = - 1000 + [1000 + 200 (P/A, 10, 3)] (P/F, 10, 1) PW(X)= 411.52 PW(Y)= 361.24 FW(X) =411.52(F/P,10,4) =602.57 FW(Y) =361.24(F/P,10,4) =528.89 AEW(X) = 602.57(A/F,10,4) =129.83 AEW(X) = 528.89(A/F,10,4) =113.95 IRR = PW(x) = - 1000 + [100 + 250(A/G,i, 4)] (P/A, i,4)= 0 By assuming i as 20 percent, PW = 83.53 i as 25 percent PW = -40.64 By Interpolation     (25 20)% 83.53 0 20% 23.4 83.53 40.64 IRR             IRR(Y) = - 1000 + 1000 (P/F, i, 1) + 200 (P/A, i, 3) (P/F, i, 1) =0 By assuming I as 30% PW = 48.63 By assuming I as 40% PW = -58.72     (40 30)% 48.63 0 30% 34.26 48.63 58.72 IRR             IRR(X - Y) PW = - 900 + 150 (P/F, i, 1)+ 400(P/F, i, 2) + 650(P/F, i, 3) = 0 By assuming i as 10% PW = 55.29 By assuming i as 15% PW = - 33.22     (15 10)% 55.29 0 10% 12.8% 55.29 33.22 IRR             Incremental Analysis with Unequal Lives Question Consider the following two mutually exclusive investment projects.
Assume MARR=15%.
Net Cash Flow n Project A Project B 0 -Rs100 -Rs200 1 Rs60 Rs120 2 Rs50 Rs270 3 Rs170 IRR 58.85% 50.00% Which project would be selected under indefinite planning horizon with project repeatability likely, based on IRR criterion.
We need to find the time basis for analysis period, as in NPW case, the analysis period is LCM (2,3) =6 years.
Forming the net cash flows; Net Cash Flow N Project A Project B 0 -Rs100 -Rs200 1 Rs60 Rs120 2 Rs50 Rs270-Rs200=Rs70 3 Rs170-Rs100=Rs70 Rs120 4 Rs60 Rs270-Rs200=Rs70 5 Rs50 Rs120 6 Rs170 Rs210 Incremental Analysis Net Cash Flow N Project B-A 0 -Rs100 1 Rs60 2 Rs20 3 Rs50 4 Rs10 5 Rs70 6 Rs40 i*B-A=35.51%, prefer Project B, since i*B-A>MAR Problems: Q No.1 Project X involves an initial outlay of Rs 32,400.
Its working life is expected to be three years.
The cash stream generated by it are expected as follows.
Calculate the Internal Rate of Return.
Assuming the minimum required rate of return to be 14%.
Would the project be selected?
Year Cash Flow 1 16,000 2 14,000 3 12,000 PW = -32400 + 16000 ( P/F,i, 1) + 14000 ( P/F,i,2 ) + 12000 ( P/F,i,3) = 0 Assuming i as 14% PW = -32400 + 16000( P/F,14,1) + 14000 ( P/F,14,2) + 12000 ( P/F,12,3) PW = 508.2 So we have to increase the value to 16% PW = - 32400 + 16000( P/F,16,1) + 14000 ( P/F,16,2) + 12000 ( P/F,16,3) PW = -513.2     (16 14)% 508.2 0 14% 14.99% 508.2 513.2 IRR             Q No2.
A capital investment of Rs 10000 can be made in a project that will produce uniform annual revenue of Rs 5,310 for five years then have a salvage value of Rs 2,000, Annual expense will be Rs 3000.
The company is willing to accept any project that will earn at least 10% per year, before income taxes on all invested capital.
Determine whether it is acceptable by using the IRR method PW = -10000 + 2310 ( P/A,i,5) + 2000 ( P/F,i,N) = 0 Assuming i as 10% PW = - 1.452 If we assume i as 9% PW =285.007     (10 9)% 285.007 0 9% 9.94% 285.007 1.452 IRR             Q No3.
In 1994 a small apartment building was purchased for Rs.
2,00,000.
Receipt them sum rent have averaged Rs.
30,200 a year, taxes, maintenance and repair cost have totalled Rs.
8620 annually.
The owner intends to held the property until she retires in 2004.
If at that time the property sells for Rs.
2,00,000, what rate of return will obtain on the investment.
We can take A/P =2,00,000/21580 = 10.79 PW = -2,00,000 + 21580 ( P/A,i,10) + 200000 ( P/F,i,10) = 0 Assuming i as 10% PW = 9700 If we assume i as 15% PW =-42254.296     (15 10)% 9700 0 10% 10.93% 9700 42254.296 IRR             QNo.
4 From the given table find IRR: End of year 0 1 2 3 4 5 Cash flow (Rs.)
- 1,0000 -800 500 500 500 1,200 Solution PW=-1,000- 800 (P/F, i, 1) + 500 (P/A, i, 3) (P/F, i, 1) + 1200 (P/F, i, 5)=0 Assuming i as 10% PW = 148.21 Assuming i as 15% PW = -106.40 QNo.5 A book store is considering expanding its facilities.
The first cost are estimated to be Rs.
50,000 with additional maintenance and operating expenses of 15,000 per year.
Additional income is anticipated to be Rs.
25,000 to the first year with 2000 per year gradient for subsequent years.
The store's MARR value is 12%.
Determine if the investment should be per sued, using an evaluation period of five years.
Solution PW= Rs.
- 50,000 - 15,000 (P/A, i,N)+ [2,5000 + 2000 (A/G, i, N) (P/A, i, N) - 50,000 - 15,000 (P/A, 15, 5) + [2,5000+ 2000 (A/G, 15, N)] (P/A, 15, 5) By assuming i = 12     (15 10)% 148.21 0 10% 12.91% 148.21 106.4 IRR             - 50,000 - 15,000 (P/A, 12, 5) + [25,000 + 2000 (A/G, 12, 5)] (P/A, 12, 5) - 50,000 - 15,000 (3.6038) + [25,000+ 2000 (1.7746)] (3.6038) - 50,000 - 54057 + [25,000+ 3549.2] (3.6038) = - 104.057+ 102885.607 = Rs.- 1171.
393 So, assumption is higher value.
So, we may take 10 as i - 50,000 - 15,000 (3.7908) + [25,000 + 2000 (1.8101)] - 50,000 - 56862 + [25,000 + 3620.2] (3.7908) - 106862 + [28620.2] (3.7908) -106862+ 108493.454 = Rs.
1631.454 By interpolation     1631.454 0 10% 2% 1631.454 1171.393 1631.454 10% 2% 2802.847 10% 2% 0.5821 10% 0.116 10.01% 10% i                            Investment should not be pursued.
Q No6.
Two mutually exclusive programs are being considered for finding.
Projected cash flow are as follows: Determine which program to recommend, assessing a MARR OF 12%.
Solution End of year Program A Rs.
Program B Rs.
B-A Rs.
0 - 10,000 - 15,000 -5000 1 3,000 5,000 2,000 2 5,000 5,000 0 3 2,000 5,000 3,000 4 4,000 5,000 1,000 Depreciation analysis Depreciation is the decrease in value of physical properties with the passage of time and use.
Most assets are worthless as they age.
Production equipment gradually becomes less valuable through wear and tear.
This lessening in value is recognized in accounting practices as an operating expense.
Instead of charging the full purchase price of a new asset as onetime expense, the outlay is spread over the life of the asset in the accounting records.
Annual depreciation deductions are intended to match the yearly fraction of value used by an asset in the production of income over the asset's actual economic life.
The actual amount of depreciation can never be established until the asset is retired from service.
Depreciation can be defined in three senses like physical depreciation, which is caused due to physical decay.
Economic depreciation is the loss of value of an asset due to outdated technology and in accounting sense depreciation is the estimated value of fall in the worth of an asset.
In accounting, depreciation charge is included in the cost of production of the asset.
Depreciation amount is rarely used for the replacement of the assets, these funds are generally utilized to find the most attractive proposals put forward to improve operations, some of which are to replace worn out and obsolete assets.
Causes of depreciation: Assets depreciate value for several reasons.
Physical depreciation Depreciation resulting in physical impairment of an asset is known as physical depreciation.
This type of depreciation results in the lowering of the ability of a physical asset to render its intended service.
The primary causes of physical depreciation are (a) deterioration due to action of the elements including the corrosion of pipe, the rotting of timbers, chemical decomposition and so on.
(b) Wear and tear from use that subjects the asset abrasion, shock vibration and the like.
These forces are caused primarily by use and result in loss of value over time.
A good maintenance program retards the rate of decline but can't check it.
Functional depreciation Functional depreciation results not from a deterioration in the assets ability to serve its intended purpose, but from a change in the demand for the services it can render.
The demand for the services of an asset may change it is more profitable to use a more efficient, unit, there is no longer work for the asset to do, or the work to be done exceeds the capacity of the asset.
Technological depreciation: Due to advancement of new technology, the old technology becomes outdated, so it loses its value.
Obsolescence resulting from the discovery of another asset that is sufficiently superior to make it uneconomical to continue using the original asset.
Assets also become obsolete when they are no longer needed.
Depreciation due to accident Sometimes due to accident or sudden failure the asset loses its technological characteristic inherent in it.
Depreciation due to depletion Consumption of an exhaustible natural resources to produce product or services is termed as depletion.
Removal of oil, timber, rock or minerals from a site decreases the value of the holding.
This decrease is compensated by a proportionate reduction in earnings derived from the resources.
Monetary depreciation A change in the price level also decreases the value of owned assets.
If prices rise during the life of an asset, then comparable replacement become more expensive.
This means that the capital recovered will be insufficient to provide an adequate substitute for the worn-out asset.
Depreciation due to time factor There are some assets, which loses its values after a particular time period.
Particularly the assets having lease, copyrights and patents right loses its value after the time is over.
Depreciation due to deferred maintenance Sometimes the loss of value of asset begin very quickly due to deferred maintenance.
If proper materials are not used or instructions to operate the machine are not properly obeyed the loss of value start.
Vocabulary of Depreciation Accounting Before going through the different method involved in the calculation of depreciation, we should have sufficient knowledge about the depreciable property.
Depreciable property is that property which can amortised or depreciated.
Depreciable property may be tangible and intangible.
Tangible property is any property that can be seen or touched.
Intangible property are property which are not tangible like copyrights and patent rights.
Depreciable tangible property is of two types i.e.
Real and personal.
Personal property is those property which is not real estate, they are machinery and equipment.
Real property is land and anything that is erected on.
Land is never depreciable.
Property is depreciable if it fulfills the following requirements: (a) The property must be used in business or help to produce income.
(b) The property must be something that wears out, decays, deteriorates, becomes obsolete, or loses value from natural causes.
(c) It must have determinable life and that life must be longer than 1 year.
In general, if property does not fulfill the above conditions can't be regarded as depreciable property.
Depreciation Methods Because an asset is allowable depreciation depends on the tax law in effect at its time of requisition, it is necessary to understand the peculiarities of tax laws at the time the property is purchased or required.
Knowledge of past tax laws regarding depreciation is especially important for understanding the tax effects associated with replacement decisions.
There are various depreciation method have evolved from time to time but there are three basic methods to understand the various calculation of depreciation schedules that are presently, in effect, it is first necessary to become acquainted with the three methods on which the current schedules are based.
Some current depreciation schedules are based on straight line depreciation and other are based on a combination of straight- line depreciation and declining balance depreciation.
Before going to discuss the basic methods and other methods of depreciation we should know some additional terms for clear understanding of the problem.
P = Purchase price (unadjusted basis) of assets.
(This is the initial cost of occurring an asset (purchase price + sales taxes) including transportation expenses.
S = Salvage value or future value at end of asset's life.
It is the expected selling price of a property when the asset can no longer be used by its owner.
N = useful (tax) life of asset - The expected period of time that a property will be used in a trade or business or to produce income.
N = Number of years of depreciation Dt (n) = Annual depreciation charges.
Bt(n) = Book value shown on accounting records at end of year.
It is the original cost, basis of the property, including any adjustments Bt(0)=p Straight line method The most widely used and simplest method for the calculation of depreciation is straight line method.
The straight-line method assumes that the value of an asset decreases at a constant rate.
Thus, if an asset has a first cost of Rs.
5,000 and an estimated salvage value of Rs.
500, the total depreciation and over its life will be Rs.
4,500.
If the estimated life in 5 years, the depreciation per year will be 4,500  5 = 900.
This is equivalent to a depreciation rate of 1 5 = 20% per year.
General expression for the calculation of depreciation and book value may be developed for the straight line method.
The depreciation in any year is Dt = General expression for the straight line method End of year Depreciation charge Book value at end of year 0 -- P 1 P F n  P F P n        2 P F n  2 P F P n        3 P F n  3 P F P n        P F n  End of year Depreciation charge Book value at end of year N P F n  P S P t n        N P F n  P F P n n        The book value is P F Bt P t n         and the depreciation rate per year is 1 n Example: From the following data find out (a) The depreciation charge during year I (h) The depreciation charge during year 2 (c) The depreciation reserve accumulated by the end of year 3 (d) The hook value at the end of year 3 Initial cost of the asset = Rs.
5000 life time = 5 years Salvage value = 0 The cost of capital 5% Solution (a) & (b) In case of straight line method as the depreciation charge is constant, the depreciation charges for year 1 and 2 is constant.
Dt (1) = Dt(2) = 5000 1000 5 P F n    per year (c) The depreciation reserve at the end of the third year is the sum of the annual depreciation charges for the first three years and is equal to 3 (1000) = Rs.
3000 (d) The book value at the end of third year is = 5000 5000 3 2000 5         Bt (3) = 5000 - 3000 = Rs.2000 Declining Balance and Double Declining Balance Method The declining balance depreciation assumes that an asset decreases in value faster early rather than in the latter portion of its service life.
By this method a fixed percentage is multiplied times the book value the asset at the beginning of the year to determine the depreciation charge for that year.
Thus, as the book value of the asset decreases through time, so does the size of the depreciation charge   1 1 1 1 1 .
.
1 t t t t t t t t t t D B B D B B B                200% arg Rateof Depreciation Incaseof DDBdepreciation Ch e N   General expression for the declining balance method of depreciation End of year Depreciation charge during year Book value at End of year 0 -- P 1  0 a B a P       0 1 1 a B a P    2   1 1 a B a R P        2 1 1 1 a B a P    3   2 2 1 a B a R P        3 2 1 1 a B a P    t   1 1 1 t t a B a a P          1 1 1 t t a B a P     N   1 1 1 n t a B a a P          1 1 1 n n a B a P     If the declining balance method of depreciation is used for income tax purposes the maximum rate that may be used is double the straight-line rate that would be allowed to a particular asset a group of assets being depreciated.
Thus, for an asset with an estimated life of N years the maximum rate that may be used with this method is R = 2/N.
Many firms and individuals choose to depreciate their assets using declining balance depreciation with the maximum allowable rate.
Such a depreciation method is commonly known as the Double Declining Balance method of depreciation.
Example: P = 7000 N = 5 Rate of Depreciation = 40% DDB = 200%/N N Book Value Dep Charge 0 7000 1 4200 2800 2 2520 1680 3 1512 1008 4 907 605 5 544 363 A difficulty may arise with the use of declining balance depreciation because in the above example salvage value is zero.
After the end of the life time or at the end of year 5, we find that the book value is 544 It is not uncommon for the book value calculated by double declining balance depreciation to exceed the asset's value at the end of its life.
This situation always occurs when S = 0.
So, it is allowable under the tax law to depreciate an asset over the early portion of its life using declining balance and then switching to straight line depreciation for the remainder of the asset's life.
The switch usually occurs when the next periods straight line depreciation amount on un depreciated balance of the asset exceeds the next periods declining balance depreciation charge.
The switch would occur at the beginning of the period n, where first Declining Balance Depreciation < straight balance on undepreciated Balance N DDB Dep Charge Book value with DDB SL Dep.
On Undepreciated balance Book value DDB - SL 0 7000 7000 1 2800 4200 1400 4200 2 1680 2520 1050 2520 3 1008 1512 840 1512 4 605 907 756 756 5 363 544 756 0 Sum of the years - Digits Method To compute the depreciation deduction by the SYD method, the digits corresponding to the number for each permissible year of life are first listed in reverse order.
The sum of these digits is then determined.
The depreciation factor for any year is a number from the reverse - ordered listing for that year divided by the sum of the digits.
For example for a property having a depreciable (useful) life of five years, SYD depreciate factors are, as follows.
Year Number of the year in Revenue order SYD Depreciation Factor 1 5 5/15 2 4 4/5 3 3 3/15 4 2 2/15 5 1 1/15 The depreciation for any year is the product of the SYD depreciation factor for that year and the difference between the cost basis (B) and the estimated final SV.
The general expression for the annual cost of depreciation for any year 7c, when N equals the depreciable life of an asset is     2 1 1 N N k dk Bv SV N N              The book value at the end of the year k is     2( ( 1 1 N N n k B SV B SV BV B k k N N N                      and the cumulative depreciation through the k l year is simply k dk B BV   Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS): MACRS was created by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and it consists of two systems to depreciate property.
The primary system is called general depreciated system while second system is the Alternative Depreciation System (ADS).
The primary difference between the two system is the ADS generally provides for a larger recovery period and it uses only the straight line method of depreciation.
Here we will discuss GDS, system of depreciation Most tangible depreciation property is handled by the MACRS (GDS) system.
Because MACRS (GDS) permit use of declining-balance with switching to the straight line method over a shorter recovery period.
Property classes To determine the depreciation schedule appropriate for depreciable property, MACRS has defined six recovery period classes for personal property and two classes for real property.
3 year property includes special material handling devices and special tools for manufacturing.
Class life ≤ 4 years.
Depreciation method: 200% declining balance switching to straight line with half year convention.
5 year property includes automobiles, legal, and heavy trucks, computers, copiers, semiconductor etc.
4 year ≤ class life < 10 year.
Depreciation method: 200% declining balance switching to straight line with half year convention.
7 year property includes property that is not assigned to another class such as office furniture's, fixtures 10 year ≤ class life < 16 years Depreciation method: 200% declining balance switching to straight line with half-year convention.
10 year property class includes assets used in petroleum refining, in the manufacturer of castings, forging 16 years ≤ class life < 20 years Depreciation method: 200% declining balance switching to straight line with half - year convention.
15 year property includes service station buildings, telephone distribution equipment, and municipal water and sewage treatment plants 20 years ≤ class life < 25 years.
Depreciation method: 150% declining balance switching to straight line with half year convention 20 year property includes buildings and municipal water.
25 years ≤ class life Depreciation Method: 150% declining balance switching to straight line with half year convention.
For real property the classes are described as follows.
Residential property includes apartment buildings and rental houses.
Depreciation method: Straight line depreciation with half year convention over 27.5 years.
Non-residential property includes office buildings, warehouses, manufacturing facilities, refineries roads etc.
Depreciation method: Straight line depreciation with half year convention as 39 years.
It is based on two assumptions: Salvage value is zero.
For Straight line use 1/N and use DDB Method.ie., 2/N Use mid-year convention MACRS Depreciation 5 Year Property 1.½ Year DDB Dep.
Charge = 0.5(0.40) X 100% = 20% 2.DDB Dep.
Charge = 0.40(100% - 20%) = 32% SL Dep.
Charge = 1/4.5(100% - 20%) = 17.77% 3.
DDB Dep.
Charge = 0.40(100% - 52%) = 19.2% SL Dep.
Charge = 1/3.5(100% - 52%) = 13.71% 4.
DDB Dep.
Charge = 0.40(100% - 71.20%) = 11.52% SL Dep.
Charge = 1/2.5(100% - 71.20%) = 11.52% 5.
SL Dep.
Charge = 1/1.5(100% - 82.72%) = 11.52% 6.
½ Year SL Dep.
Charge = 0.5(11.52%) = 5.76% After-Tax Comparison Till yet we have compared different alternatives by PW, FW, EAW, and IRR methods.
In every economic analysis the comparison were made by not taking tax into consideration.
But we know most of the firms pays different types of taxes and one of the most important tax is income tax which is levied on the net income of the person.
But tax in most of the time influence production decision and other decision.
In this section we will compare the cash flow after tax.
In many situations, before tax analysis provide adequate solutions.
When the alternative being compared are to satisfy required function and are affected identically by taxes.
Evaluation of public projects don't take taxes into consideration.
So tax effects occasionally cause the preference to switch among alternatives between before and after tax evaluations.
A simple adjustment of the rate of return calculated without regard for taxes gives a reasonable approximation to the after tax rate of return.
IRR after tax = IRR before tax (1 - effective income tax rate) For an example, the after tax rate of return resulting from a before tax IRR of 10% and an effective income tax rate of 40% would be IRR after tax = 0.10 ( 1 - 0.40 ) =6% Before going for after tax comparison we have to know how after tax cash flow tables are prepared.
There are different column heading and column number for this purpose.
In all the after tax flow tables these headings should be identical identification numbers.
Depreciation Analysis 9.17 Column heading Column number Arithmetic computation in column Calendar year Investment year 1 Before tax operating cash flow 2 Book value before depreciation 3 MACRS depreciation rate 4 Depreciation charge 5 4 x original basis Book value after depreciation 6 (3) - (5) Cash flow for debt 7 Cash flow for debt interest 8 Taxable Income 9 (2) - (5) - (8) Cash flow for taxes 10 Tax rate x (9) After - tax cash flow 11 (2) - (7) - (10) After tax comparison can be made by any comparison methods like PW EAW or IRR.
From the given example this can be made clear.
Example Initial Cost: 45,000 Annual Revenue: 23,000 Annual expenses :7300 N=5 Years 5 Year MACRS Property Income tax rate :40% PW = -45000 +(23000-7300)(P/A,I,6) =0 IRR = 26.3% IRR after Tax = IRR before Tax (1-effective income tax rate) IRR after tax = 26.3%(1-0.40)= 15.8% N BTCF DC Taxable Taxes ATCF Income (40%) 0 - 45,000 - - - -45000 1 15700 9000 6700 2680 13020 2 15700 14400 1300 520 15180 3 15700 8640 7060 2824 12876 4 15700 5184 10516 4206 11943.6 5 15700 5184 10516 4206 11943.6 6 15700 2592 13108 5243 10456.8 PW= -45000 + 13020(P/F,i,1) + 15180(P/F,i,2) + 12876(P/F,i,3) + 11943.6(P/F,i,4) + 11943.6(P/F,i,5) + 10456.8(P/F,i,6) = 0 PW(17%)= 709.18 PW(18%)= -401.57 So, with the help of interpolation, the IRR (after-tax) = 17.6% (18 17)%(709.18 0) 17% 709.18 ( 401.57) IRR after Tax           Analysis of Public Project Public project evaluation is a micro planning technique which is used to assess the social desirability of a project in valuing public expenditure.
The standards by which private enterprise evaluates its activities are markedly different from those that apply to public activities.
In general private activities are evaluated in terms of profitability.
Public activities on the other hand, are evaluated in terms of general welfare.
The economic evaluation of public activities proceeds on the basic tenant that the purpose of government is to serve its citizens.
Engineering is a major factor in nearly all public activities because of the high levels of technological input required.
It is evident that the complexity of systems and projects being undertaken by the federal and local government is increasing instead of decreasing.
The contribution of engineering to the nation's spaces program, national defense, pollution control, urban renewal and highway construction is well established.
Engineering input of these activities involves engineers as employees of governmental agencies and as consultants to these agencies.
These, public activities are a concern of all engineers as citizens and many engineers as outlets for their talents.
The engineering process involved in the phases of determination of objectives, identification of strategic factors, determination of means, evaluation of engineering proposals, and assistance in decision making.
Each of these phases is applicable in public activities.
The main modification required is the substitution of benefit or general welfare for profit.
Benefit / Cost Analysis Evaluation of public projects refers to the evaluation of the cost and benefits of each investment proposal meant for the inclusion in a plan.
The most common way to approach public project evaluation is by benefit cost analysis.
Often this approach is called cost - benefit analysis.
Benefit cost analysis is one means to arrive at an informal decision on which project to invest.
Schmid says that B/C analysis is an analytical framework for organising thoughts, listing the pros and cons of alternatives and determining values for all prelevent factors so that the alternate can be ranked.
Companies suggest that the B/C analysts play the role of technician, providing information and analysis to politically responsible decision makers.
Criteria for Cost / Benefit Analysis: In comparing benefit to cost several different perspective are reasonable, which partially explain, why B/C analysis does not select an alternative, it develops information that can be used as the basis for a decision.
These criteria are B/C, AB/AC, B-C, AB-AC.
If the project is independent it will be selected if B/C > 1 In case of mutually exclusive projects and expansion of project.
AB/AC should be taken in to consideration.
AB/AC should be greater than one for the selection of the project.
B-C Criteria is undertaken to maximise advantage of benefit over cost.
Example: CC = Construction Cost AMC = Annual Maintenance Cost AFB = Annual Flood benefit AIB = Annual Irrigational benefit ARB = Annual Recreational Benefit N = 40 years i= 4% Dam sites CC AMC AFB AIB ARB 1 1,200,000 20000 200000 20000 30000 1 & 2 1,500,000 35000 190000 40000 30000 1, 2 & 3 2,700,000 50000 280000 60000 60000 1, 2, 3 & 4 3,500,000 60000 300000 70000 70000 Dam Site AB AC ΔB ΔC B/C ΔB/ΔC = 10000/30156 = 0.33 ΔB/ΔC = (400000 - 250000) / (186404 - 80624 ) = 1.42 ΔB/ΔC = 40000/50416 = 0.79 Quantification of Cost and Benefit Analysis In cost 'benefit analysis, cost never refers the cost of production or the project cost, other costs are also taken into consideration.
The calculation of cost of project is very difficult because various types of costs are considered in its construction.
Like that benefit refers not only monetary benefits but also non- monetary benefits.
So before comparing the benefits and cost of a project, they should be quantified properly.
Imputed cost of existing assets employed on a project should be included when there are alternate uses for the assets.
For instance land and facilities desired for use in another project besides the one being analyzed would be treated in both project as costs on fair market values.
1 250000 80624 3.10 1 & 2 260000 110780 10000 30156 2.35 1, 2 & 3 400000 186440 140000 75624 2.15 1, 2, 3 & 4 440000 236820 40000 50416 1.86 Preliminary cost of investigation and technical services required to get a project started are part of the project's budget.
Once the project is underway, interest charges during the construction period before earnings begin are applicable expenditures.
Management cost, whether incurred by the sponsoring agency or contributed by the beneficiaries are part of the total project cost.
There are some cost which are known as spillover costs.
Spillover cost constitutes all significant adverse effect caused by the construction and operation of a project expressed in terms of market prices regardless of whether actual outlays for compensation are made.
For example an irrigation project may reduce the quality of the water, if some expenditure are made to improve the quality of the water is included in the project cost of the irrigation.
Public projects provide certain benefit or family of benefit.
It is very difficult to quantify the public benefit.
There are certain public goods, they don't have any market value because no private sector provide these services.
In such cases the valuation should be made in indirect manner.
If the government is going to construct the bridge or dam in a particular area, how far this dam has increased the saving potential and income can be taken as the increase in benefit.
Some attributes of a public project are intangible.
A more systematic approach to the valuation of intangible characteristic defines categories of attributes and employs a subjective rating system to rank the quality of different projects.
Limitations Cost benefits analysis is a powerful technique regarding the selection and rejection of project even then it is not free from drawbacks.
Some of its limitations are as under.
Difficulties in Benefits Assessment The correct estimation from a project also becomes difficult due to uncertainly regarding the future demand and supply of the products from a new project and their prices.
Another difficulty arises from the existence of external economies.
The presence of external economics may lead to the selling of the product of project at price equal to marginal cost and not equal to average which will create a deficit and efforts are made by a special levy on consumers or through budgeted resources.
Arbitrary discount rate The social rate of discount assumed for any project is arbitrary.
There is no perfect method to find social discount rate.
It remains a subjective phenomenon.
But if there is a small change in social discount rate it may change the full results of project evaluation.
Arbitrary large discount rates does not help in calculating the net present value of benefits of long term projects.
Ignores opportunity cost It also ignores the problem of opportunity cost.
Griffin and Enos state that "if all prices reflect opportunity cost, all projects for which B/C <1, would be chosen."
Problem of externalities The side effects of a project are difficult to calculate in the analysis.
There may be technological and pecuniary externalities of a river valley project, such as the effects of flood control measures or a storage dam as the productivity of land at other places in vicinity.
Difficulties in the cost assessment Cost estimates are made on the basis of the choice of techniques, locations and prices of factor services used.
Market prices of factors of production are used for this purpose provided they reflect opportunity cost.
But in underdeveloped countries, market prices usually do not reflect the opportunity cost.
Neglects joint benefits and cost It ignores the problem of joint benefits and costs arising from a project.
There are number of direct and indirect benefits flowing from river valley project, but it is difficult to evaluate and calculate such benefits separately.
Similarly the joint cost which cannot be separated and calculated benefit wise.
Some applications of cost-benefit Analysis Public project affects both benefit and disbenefit in terms of taxation to the people.
Of course, there are so many criticism goes against the analysis because when the analysis don't provide the correct result after the completion of the project.
It can be stated that there may not be anything wrong with analysis but the manner which the projects are undertaken, this changes the result.
The well publicized cases of dam that failed to stop flooding as promised and project overruns that boosted costs well above anticipated benefits could be considered as evidence of the need for more exacting benefit/cost analysis, rather than of deficiencies in the B/C criterion.
In addition to the criticism like selection of discount rate and fairness of benefit measurements, criticism has been leveled at the way in which the analysis is conducted.
It is claimed that unrealistically high values have been assigned to intangibles to compensate for low monetary benefits in projects that would be unacceptable if evaluated only on recognition as non-monetary, benefits.
Cost have been underestimated, say critics because the local impact of major federal projects was not anticipated, labour and material prices went up because of increased local demand caused by the project to the detriment of both project expenses, and consumers in the community.
Projects are sometimes undertaken without the support of resident in the area.
Planners are thus forced into the position of selling residents what is good for them which requires selling campaign that may create costly delays or added community relations costs.
Q No1.
Three mutually exclusive alternative public works projects are currently under consideration.
Their respective costs and benefits are included in the table below.
Each of the project has a useful life of 50 years and the nominal interest rate is 10 per cent per year.
Which of any of these project should be selected?
A B C Rs Rs Rs Capital considerent 8,500,000 10,000,000 12,000,000 Annual maintenance cost 750,000 725,000 100,000 Salvage value 1,250,000 1,750,000 2,000,000 Annual benefit 2,150,000 2,265,000 2,500,000 Solution: The problem can also solved served by taking into consideration the present worth of benefits and present worth of costs.
pw (cost A) = 8,5000,000 + 750,000 (P/A, 10%50) - 1,250,000 (P/F, 10%, 50) = 15,925,463 pw (cost B) = 10,000,000 + 725,000 (P/A, 10%, 50) - 1,750,000 (P/F, 10, 50) = 17,173,333 pw (cost c) = Rs 12,000,000 + 100,000 (P/A, 10%, 50) - 2000,000 (P/F, 10%, 50) = Rs 18,923,333 pw (Benefit, A) = Rs 2,150,000 (P/A, 10, 50) = 21,316851 pw (Benefit B) = 2,265,000 (P/A, 10%50) = 22,451,055 pw (Benefit C) = Rs 2,750,000 (P/A, 10%50) = 24,787,036 B/C &A = 21,316,851 15,925,463 > 1.0 it is acceptable.
  / B C B A    = (22,457,055 - 21,316,851)/(17,173,333 - 15,925,463) = 0.9137 < 1.0 it is not acceptable.
  / B C C A    = (24,787,036 - 21,316,851)/(18,923,333 - 15,925,463, = 1.1576 > 1.0 it is acceptable.
So recommend project C. Q No 2.
Two mutually exclusive projects are being considered for investment project.
Project A1 requires an initial outlay of Rs.
30,00,000 with net receipts estimated as Rs.9,00,000 per year for the next 5 years.
The initial outlay for Project A2 is Rs 60,00,000 and net receipts have been estimated at 15,00,000 per year for the next 7 years.
There is no salvage value associated with the either of the projects.
Using the benefit cost ratio, which project would you select?
Assume an interest of 10% .
Introduction to Micro Economics and Macro Economics, Theory of demand, Elasticity of demand, Price elasticity of demand, Measurement of elasticity of demand; Income elasticity and cross elasticity of demand, Demand forecasting; Law of supply, Elasticity of supply.
Introduction to Micro Economics and Macro Economics The subject matter of economics can be broadly divided in to two parts.
; Micro economics and Macroeconomics.
The term Micro economics is derived from the word micros which means small and the term Macro is derived from the word large.
So therefore Micro economics studies behavior of individual consumer, individual firm and small aggregate or groups individual units.
On the other hand Macroeconomics concerned with the analysis of the economy as a whole and its large aggregates such as total national output and income, total employment, total consumption and aggregate investment.
According to Boulding "Micro economics is the study of particulars firm, particular households, individual prices, wages,I ncomes, individual industries, particular commodities.
He defines Macroeconomics as "Macro deals not with individual income but with national income, not with individual prices but with price levels not with individual outputs but with the national output.
MICRO ECONOMICS Micro economic is that branch of economics which studies the economic actions and behavior of individual units and small groups of individual units.
Micro economic theory seek to determine the mechanism by which the different economic units attain the position of equilibrium., proceeding from the individual units to a narrowly defined groups such as industries and markets.
micro economics concerned itself with individual industries and markets since it does not study the totality of behavior of all units in the economy.
Micro economics, Price system and allocation of resources.
Micro economics helps us in allocating the scarce resources.
As the resources are given, we have unlimited wants, micro economics helps us in allocating limited resources on unlimited wants.
On the other hand, it is allocation of resources that determine what goods shall be produced and how they shall be produced.
While allocating resources it also helps in determining the prices of different goods and commodities so also determine the different factor of production.
Micro economics and economic efficiency.
Beside analyzing the pricing of product and factors and the allocation of resources based on the price mechanism, micro economics also seeks to explain whether the allocation of resources determined is efficient.
Economic efficiency in the allocation of resources is attained when the resources are so allocated that maximize the satisfaction of the people.
Economic efficiency is of three types efficiency in production, efficiency in distribution of goods among the people and allocate economic efficiency.
Efficiency in production involves producing the maximum possible amounts of various goods from the given available resources.
Efficiency in consumption consists of distributing the given amount of produced goods and services among millions of the people for consumption in such a way as to maximize the total satisfaction of the society.
The whole structure of Micro economics is presented below.
MACRO ECONOMICS Macro-economic analyses the behavior of the whole economic system in totality or entirety.
In other words, macro-economic studies, the behavior of the large aggregate such as total employment, the national product or income, the general price level of the economy.
The macroeconomics is otherwise known as aggregate economics.
Macroeconomics as a study of determination of Income and Employment.
Macroeconomics explain the factor that determine the level of national income and employment.
It also studies the different reasons for the economic fluctuations and its impact on level of national income and employment.
Macroeconomics, General level of price and Inflation.
Not only macroeconomics determines level of income and employment but also it deals with showing how the general level of prices is determined It also discusses the cause of inflation, and deflation in the economy.
The contribution of Keynes is lot so far as economic fluctuation is concerned Macroeconomics and economic growth.
Macros economics also studies the different theory of economic growth.
Economic growth theory is one of the important branches of macroeconomics to day.
The whole structure of Macroeconomics is presented below Theory of demand Demand and supply are two forces which help the market economy to function.
In a competitive market price of goods and services are determined by the help of demand and supply.
The prices in turn influence demand and supply of goods and play an important role in allocation of resources in a market economy.
It is necessary to know the meaning of demand before discussing the law of demand.
Generally, people refer to the wants or desire for a thing is demand.
But mere desire for a thing is not demand in economics.
In economics only the effective desires are called demand.
Effective desires refer three things.
(a) the desire for the commodity (b) willingness to buy and (c) the purchasing power to buy.
The demand also connected with price over a given period of time.
The term demand is defined in different economist in different ways from time to time.
Some of the important definitions are given below According to Hanson "By demand, we mean the quantity of a commodity that will be purchased at a particular price and not merely the desire of a thing".
According to Chapman "Demand is the quantity of expression of preferences".
TYPES OF DEMAND 1.
Price Demand: Price demand refers to the various quantizes of the commodity when the consumer will buy per unit of time and at certain price.
There is inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded.
D = f(p) 2.
Income Demand: Income demand shows the relationship between the income of the consumer and quantity demanded.
There is a positive relationship between income and quantity demanded.
In case of normal goods there is positive relationship and incase of inferior goods there is inverse relationship between income and quantity demanded.
3.
Cross Demand: Cross demand refers to the relationship between quantity demanded of good 'x' and price of related good 'y' other things being constant.
From cross demand we mean the change in the quantity demanded of a commodity without any change in its price but due to the change in the prices of related goods.
4.
Direct and Indirect Demand: The demand for consumer goods which satisfy the human want directly is called direct demand.
On the other hand the demand for …producer goods which satisfy the human want indirectly is called indirect demand.
5.
Joint Demand and Composite Demand: If the demand for one commodity leads to the demand for other is called joint demand.
For an example the demand for motor bike and petrol are joint demand.
On the other hand, demand is said to be composite when a thing is demanded for the more purposes.
The demand for electricity and coal is composite as they are used for several purposes.
6.
Alternate Demand: When the demand is fulfilled in alternate way is called alternate demand.
Let us consider the demand for light.
It has an alternate demand.
7.
Direct and Derived Demand: Certain goods which satisfy our wants directly are called to have direct demand.
The demand for consumer goods are called direct demand.
On the other hand, the goods and services which fulfill our wants indirectly are called derived demand.
Demands for producer goods are called derived demand.
8.
Competitive Demand: Demand for substitutes is known as competitive demand i.e.
the demand for one commodity reduces the demand for other commodity.
For example the demand for vegetable oil and that of butter oil are the competitive demand.
THE LAW OF DEMAND THE LAW OF DEMAND The law of demand expresses the functional relationship between price and quantity demanded.
According to the law of demand other things being equal, if a price of a commodity falls, the quantity demanded of it will rise, and if price of the commodity rises., the quantity demanded will fall.
Thus according to the law of demand there is inverse relationship between price and quantity demand other things remaining the same.
It can be expressed as Dx = f(Px, Py, Y, T) Px = Demand for x Py = Price of Y Y = Income of the consumer T = Taste Assumption: According to Stigler and Boulding, the law of demand is based on the following assumptions.
1.
There should be no change in the income of the consumer.
2.
There should be no change in the taste and preference of the consumer.
3.
Price of related commodities should remain unchanged.
4.
The commodity in question should be normal.
5.
There should not be any changes in the size of the population.
6.
There should be perfect competition in the market Demand schedule and demand curve: The law of demand can be explained through a demand schedule and a demand curve.
A demand schedule is presented in table 1.
Demand schedule can be individual demand schedule or market demand schedule.
Considering other things being equal individual demand schedule refers to the commodities demanded by the consumer at various price.
Demand schedule of an individual consumer Price(Rs) Quantity Demanded (Unit) 10 5 8 8 6 12 4 15 2 20 From the above table it is seen that as price per unit say (x) goes on falling, the quantity demand goes on increasing.
When the price of good (x) is 10 quantity demanded is 5 units.
As such when price fall to Rs.8 the quantity demanded increases to 8 units.
We can convert this demand schedule in to a demand curve by graphically plotting the various price-quantity combinations.
and this has been done in fig.1.
In fig.1, OX axis measures the different quantities of goods (x )and OY axis price per unit of good x .
FIGURE1 By joining the various combination points we get a curve DD, which is known as demand curve.
This is the demand curve is a graphic statement on presentation of qualities of a good demanded by the consumer at various possible prices in a period of time.
Market Demand: The market demand is the sum of total of demand of all consumers in the market for a commodity at various prices.
So, we can have market demand for a commodity by adding up the quantities demanded of the commodity at various prices.
Suppose there are three consumers in the market A, B and C of commodity (x) whose demand schedule are given in the table 2 : PRICE QD by A QD by B QD by C Market Demand 10 0 5 10 15 8 5 10 15 30 6 10 20 25 55 4 15 25 30 70 5 20 30 35 85 QD = Quantity Demanded By adding up the quantities demanded of the commodity by three consumers at various prices we get the market demand schedule tab.2.
The market demand curve is the horizontal summation of all individuals demand for the commodity.
This can be shown in the diagram given below.
The FIGURE 2(A), 2(B), 2(C) shows the individual demand curve, D1D1, D2D2, D3D3 are the demand curves for consumer A, B and C, the market demand curve DD.
It is assumed that there are three consumers in the market facing same price of the commodity but they purchase according to their individual requirements.
A + B + C = Market Demand Reasons for the law of demand.
Why does demand curve slope down: So far as the law of demand is concerned it states there is inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded.
Now the important question is why the demand curve slopes downward to right.
In other words, why the law of demand decreases by describing price demand relationship is valid.
There are several reasons responsible for the inverse price demand relationship which have been explained as under.
Income effect: when price of a commodity falls money income remaining constant real income increases.
The consumer can buy more quantity of the commodity with his given income.
If the consumer chooses to buy the same amount of the commodity as before some money will be left with him because he has to spend less on the commodity due to its lower price.
This increase in real income induces the consumer to buy more of that commodity.
This is called income effect.
Substitution effect: Another important reason why the consumer consumes more when price fall in substitution effect.
When price of a commodity falls, it becomes relatively cheaper than its substitutes.
This indicates the consumer to substitute the commodity when price has fallen for other commodities which have now becomes relatively dearer.
For instance, tea and coffee are the substitute goods.
If the price of tea goes down, the consumer may substitute tea for coffee, although price of coffee remains same.
Therefore, with fall in price the demand will increase due to unfavorable substitution effect.
Law of diminishing marginal utility: The law of demand can be derived from the law of diminishing marginal utility.
The law of marginal utility states that as the consumer consumes one goods after another the utility derived from each successive unit goods are decreasing.
It means as the price of the commodity falls, consumer purchases more of the commodity so that marginal utility from the commodity falls to be equal to the reduced price and vice versa.
New Consumers: When a price of a commodity falls the consumer who were not consuming the commodity before will start purchasing the commodity.
As a result the total demand in the market goes up.
Psychological Effects: When the price of the commodity falls, people favor to buy more which is natural and psychological.
Therefore, the demand increases with the fall in prices.
Exceptions to the law of demand: Law of demand is generally behaved to be valid in most of the situations.
But there are some situations when the law does not work.
Articles of distinction: Veblen Effect: One exception to the law of demand is associated with the name of the economist Veblen who prepared the …doctrine….
of conspicuous consumption.
According to him "Articles of distinction command more demand when their prices are high.
Article of distinction include jewellery, diamonds, costly carpets etc.
the rich people demand more of such commodities when their prices are high".
If the prices of these commodities goes down, they no longer remain the article of distinction and so have less demand.
Giffen goods : Robert Giffen pointed out another exception to the law of demand.
He observed in Britain when the prices of bread went up people purchased more bread and not less of it.
The reason given for this is that these British workers consumed a diet of mainly bread and when the price of bread went up they were compel to spend more on given quantity of bread.
Therefore, they could not afford to purchase as much meat as before.
Thus they substituted even bread for meat.
Such goods are considered as Giffen goods and there is direct relationship between price and quality demanded.
War or Emergency: During the period of war if there is fear of shortage people may start buying for holding and building stocks, even at high prices, they will buy less at low prices.
Ignorance: Sometimes people buy more of a commodity at a higher price out of their ignorance.
Therefore, irrational consumer generally buys at higher price.
Purchase in anticipation: Sometimes people buy more at a higher price to earn more profit in the future.
Determinants of Demand: The law of demand states other things remains constant more is demand at lower price and less is demanded at higher price.
But when there is change in these other things, the whole demand schedule or demand curve undergoes a change.
The following are the factors which determine demand for goods.
Taste and preference of the consumer: Taste and preference of the consumer is one of the important determinants of demand.
Taste and preference include fashion, habits, customs, advertisements, climate and new invention etc.
The price remaining constant if there is change in taste and preference of the consumer there will be changes in demand.
Income of the consumer: The demand for goods also depends upon income of the people.
The greater the income of the people the greater will be their demand for goods.
Generally there is direct relationship between income of the consumer and his demand.
The demand for normal goods rises, with an increase in income and falls with a fall in income.
But incase of an unfair good when the income increases the demand for these goods becomes less.
On the other hand, when the income falls the demand for inferior goods increases.
Changes in the prices of related goods: The demand for good is also affected by the prices of other goods, especially those which are related to it as substitutes or components.
When we draw the demand curve or demand schedules, we generally assume the prices of related goods remain constant.
Therefore, when the prices of related goods, substitute or complements change, the whole demand curve.
would change its position, it will shift upward or downward as the case may be.
When the rise in prices of a good causes increase in demand for another good the two goods are called substitute goods.
On the other hand, the goods which are complementary with each other, rise in price of any of them will lead to the decrease in the demand for other goods and cause a leftward shift in its demand curve.
The goods which are complementary with each other, the change in the price of any of them would affect the demand of other.
The number of consumers in the market: The increase or decrease in consumers in the market also influence the demand of a product.
The greater number of consumers of a good, the greater the market demand for it.
If the consumer substitutes one goods for another, then the number of consumers of that good which has been substituted by the other will decline and for the good which has been used in its place, the number of consumers will increase.
Sometimes also the seller may succeed in finding out new markets for his good and as a result the market for his good expands.
Another important factor which increases the consumers in the market is population grown.
Increase in population leads to an increase in demand for all types of goods.
Distribution of wealth: The amount demanded of a commodity is also influenced by the distribution of wealth in the society.
If there is an equal distribution of income in the society, the demand will be higher and incase of inequality demand will be less.
Government Policy: Govt.
policy is also responsible to influence the demand for the commodity.
The government imposes taxes on various commodities which lead to an increase in the price of the commodities.
As a result, the demand goes down.
Change in demand and change in quantity demanded: Change in demand is a multi-valued function.
The change in demand occurs when other non-price factors change, price remain same.
In case of change in demand we have a separate demand, schedule which may shift the demand curve to the left or right.
So, we have to …move from one demand curve to another demand curve.
Change in demand can be increase in demand where price remain constant but there is increase in demand.
On the other hand decrease in demand is said to occur when there exists less demand at same price and same demand at less price.
This is shown in the diagram below.
In fig 3 when price was OP the quantity demanded was Oq Fig.3 But price has remained constant, quantity demanded has increased to 1 Oq .
There is rightward shift of the demand curve.
In the second situation price is same op but there is reduction in demand from oq to oq2.
This situation may happen after other things did not remain same.
On the other hand, change in quantity demanded in a single valued function depending only on price.
It occurs when price exchanges other non-price factors remain constant.
We mark as the same demand curve turn left to measure along a demand curve only.
It should be remembered that extension and extraction in the demand takes place as a result of change in the price alone when other determinants of demand such as tastes, …income, propensity to consume and prices of the related goods remain constant.
It is shown in the diagram given below.
Fig 4 It will be seen in fig.4 that when price of the good is op, the quantity demand is Oq.
Now if, price of the goods falls to 1 OP , the quantity demanded increases from Oq to 1 Oq , on the other hand if price of the good rise from op to op2 the quantity demanded falls to 2 Oq DEMAND FUNCTION The general demand function Qd = f(Px, I, Pr, T, A) Px = Price of the commodity x I = Income of the individual Pr = Prices of related commodities T = Taste and preference of the consumer A = Advertising expenditure But in many cases we assume other things remain constant, the demand is only a function of price.
So the demand function Qd = f(Px) As we know there is inverse Relationship between price and quantity demanded, so when we express their relationship in a curve, we get a downward slopping demand curve.
Thus the demand curve is graphic representation of demand function with price as the only independent variable.
But the level of position of demand have depend on other factors which are hold constant.
When there is change in other determining factors the whole demand curve will shift.
But the demand function Qd = f(Px) is a general function, if we want to estimate demand for a commodity we require a specific from of the demand function.
It can be written as Qd = a - b Px.
It is a linear form Where a is a constant intercept term on the X axis and b is the coefficient showing the slope of the demand curve.
Numerical Example.
.
Gurgling Springs, Inc. is a bottler of natural spring water distributed throughout the NewEngland states.
Five-gallon containers of GSI spring water are regionally promoted and distributed through grocery chains.
Operating experience during the past year suggests the following demand function for its spring water.
Ans.
Q = 250 - 100P + 0.0001Pop + 0.003I + 0.003A where Q is quantity in thousands of five-gallon containers, P is price (Rs), Pop is population, I is disposable income per capita (Rs), and A is advertising expenditures (Rs).
P = $4, Pop = 4,000,000 persons, I = $50,000 and A = $400,000 Q = 250 - 100 (4) + 0.0001(4,000,000) + 0.003($50,000) + 0.003($400,000) Q = 250 - 400 + 400 + 150 + 1200 Q = 1600 When price is Rs 4 the quantity demanded is 1600.
According to the law of demand other thing remaining constant more is demanded at lower price and less is demanded at higher price.
So price is the only determinant of demand other factor remain constant.
So Q = f (P) If price falls to Rs3 Q = 250 - 100 (3) + 0.0001(4,000,000) + 0.003($50,000) + 0.003($400,000) Q = 250 - 300 + 400 + 150 + 1200 Q = 1700 If price rises up to Rs5 Q = 250 - 100 (5) + 0.0001(4,000,000) + 0.003($50,000) + 0.003($400,000) Q = 250 - 500 + 400 + 150 + 1200 Q = 1500.
If we plot this on a diagram we will find the demand curve.
In the diagram presented below OX axis represents the quantity demanded and OY axis represents Price.
When price is Rs3 the quantity demanded is 1700.
When price is Rs5 the demand is 1500.
If price falls to Rs4 the demand again goes up to 1600.
Price Quantity demanded 3 1700 4 1600 5 1500 Calculate the quantity demanded at prices of Rs5, Rs4, and Rs3.
Q = 250 - 100 (5) + 0.0001(4,000,000) + 0.003($50,000) + 0.003($400,000) Q = 250 - 500 + 400 + 150 + 1200 Q = 1500.
At a price 4 Q = 250 - 100 (4) + 0.0001(4,000,000) + 0.003($50,000) + 0.003($400,000) Q = 250 - 400 + 400 + 150 + 1200 Q = 1600 At price 3 Q = 250 - 100 (3) + 0.0001(4,000,000) + 0.003($50,000) + 0.003($400,000) Q = 250 - 300 + 400 + 150 + 1200 Q = 1700 Calculate the prices necessary to sell 1,250, 1,500, and 1,750 thousands of five-gallon containers.
Q = 250 - 100 p + 0.0001(4,000,000) + 0.003(Rs50,000) + 0.003(Rs400,000) 1250 = 250 - 100p+ 400 + 150 + 1200 100p = 250 + 400 + 150 + 1200 - 1250 100 P = 750 P = $ 7.5 So if Q = 1250.
P = $7.5 If Q = 1500 Q = 250 - 100 p + 0.0001(4,000,000) + 0.003(Rs50,000) + 0.003(Rs400,000) 1500 = 250 - 100p+ 400 + 150 + 1200 100p = 250 + 400 + 150 + 1200 - 1500 100 P = 500 P = $ 5 If Q = 1750 Q = 250 - 100 p + 0.0001(4,000,000) + 0.003(Rs50,000) + 0.003(Rs400,000) 1750 = 250 - 100p+ 400 + 150 + 1200 100p = 250 + 400 + 150 + 1200 - 1750 100 P = 250 P = $ 2.5 Elasticity of Demand The law of demand states that when the price of a good falls, its quantity demanded rises and vice versa.
The law of demand only indicates the direction of change in quantity demand in response to change in price.
But the demand theory is silent about the degree of change in price and quantity demanded.
This information as to how much or to what extent the quantity demanded of a good will change in its price in provided by the concept of price elasticity of demand.
The concept of elasticity of demand therefore refers to the degree of responsiveness of quantity demanded of a good to a change in its price consumers income and prices of related goods.
Accordingly there are three concepts of demand elasticity; price elasticity, income elasticity and cross elasticity.
PRICE ELASTICITY OF DEMAND Price elasticity of demand is defined as the ratio of the percentage change in quantity demanded of a commodity to a percentage exchange in price.
Thus ep = Percentage change in quantity demanded Percentage change in price ep= Proportionately change in the quantity demanded Propotionately change in price ep=     2 1 1 2 1 1 Q Q Q P P P   Types of price elasticity: Different products react differently to the price change.
A price for a essential product such as salt has little impact on demand while the price change in other product has huge impact on demand.
Price elasticity are generally classified in to the following categories.
1- Perfectly elasticity demand (ep = ) Perfectly elastic demand is said to happen when a little change in price leads to an infinite change in quantity demanded.
A small rise in price on the other hand reduces the demand to zero.
In such a case the demand curve is horizontal to OX axis as shown in the diagram.
2.
Perfectly in elastic demand (ep=0): In case of perfectly in elastic demand, irrespective of any rise or fall in price of a commodity, the quantity demanded remains the same.
The perfectly inelasticity 3.
Unitary elastic: The demand is said to have unitary elastic when a given proportionate change in the price level brings about and equal proportionate change in quantity demanded.
The ep = 1 4.
Relatively Elastic: Relatively elasticity demand is a situation in which a small change in price leads to a large change in quantity demanded (ep>1) 5.
Relatively inelastic: Under the relative inelastic demand a given percentage change in price produces a relatively less percentage change in quantity demanded.
(Ep<1) Factors determining price elasticity of demand: (a) Nature of the Product : Whether the demand for a particular product is more elastic or less elastic it depends upon the nature of the commodities.
The demand for product that fall in the category of necessities are usually inelastic.
This is because their demand do not change when there is a change in price (Food, medicine).
On the other hand the demand for luxurious are elastic where even a small change in price reflects on a huge change in the demand.
(b) Number of users : Elasticity of demand for any commodity depends on the number of users.
Demand is elastic if a commodity has more users and inelastic if it has only one use.
As electricity has multiple users, if its price falls it will be demanded more.
But if its price rises minimum will be demanded for every purpose.
(c) Substitution: When a product has many substitutes than its demand will be relatively elastic.
This is because if the price of a substitute goes down than customers switch to that substitute and vice versa.
Products without substitute has weak substitutes have relatively inelastic demand.
(d) Postponement of the consumption : The goods and commodities whose consumption can be postponed are more elastic in nature.
For example if the prices of silk rises., its demand will fall drastically because its consumption can be postponed to the future.
On the other hand the commodities whose consumption can't be postponed are less elastic.
The use of medicines can't be put off.
Hence the demand for medicine is inelastic.
Income level : People with high income are less affected by price changes.
On the other hand people with low income are highly affected by price rise.
People with high income will not change their buying habits because of the increase in price of either essential commodities or luxurious while other will cut back on purchase of certain commodities to compensate for the essential commodities if there is a price increase.
Proportion of income spent : When a person spends only a very small part of his income on certain product the price change in these products does not materially affect his demand for the product.
Here the demand is inelastic.
Habits: If consumers are habituated of some commodities, the demand for such commodities will be usually inelastic.
It is because that the consumer will use them even their prices goes up.
MEASUREMENT OF ELESATICITY OF DEMAND Percentage Method : Price elasticity can be precisely measured by dividing the percentage change in quantity demanded by the percentage change in price that caused it.
Price elasticity = Percentage change in quantity demanded Percentage change in price ep = 100 100 q q p p q p q p q p p q           ep = price elasticity q = original quantity p = original price = a small change Example: The price of a commodity is 150 and its quantity demanded is 50 kg, if its price falls to 100 and quantity demanded increases to 100 kg, calculate elasticity of demand.
P = 150 P1 = 100 Q = 50 Q1 = 100 Ep = 100 50 150 100 150 50 50 3 50 3        (-) sign is attached because quantity demanded and price are inversely related.
Point Method: We can measure elasticity of demand at any point on a straight-line demand curve.
Suppose we want to measure elasticity of demand at point R. segment upper segment lower ep Rt RT OQ QT ep Rt RT OQ QT therefore Ot to parallel is QR OtT triangle the in Now OQ QT OQ QR QR QT ep get we ii equation in RM MR of place in QR QT Writing QR QT RM MR So similar are RQT and RMR trangles Therefore triangles the both to common is MRR Third right RQT RMR ng coorespodi QTR R MR RQT and RMR triangle Take ii OQ QR RM MR ep Therefore QR OP and RM PP and MR QQ fig In OQ OP PP QQ ep i q p p q ep p p q q ep p p q q ep price in change e oportionat demanded quantity in change e oportionat elasticity ice                                     , , ' ) ( ' ' ' , . '
) ( ' ) ( ' ' ) ....( ' , ' ' ' . '
' ) .......( Pr Pr Pr So, from this formula we can find out elasticity of demand at any point of a straight-line demand curve.
This is shown in the diagram given below.
In case of a non-linear demand curve to measure the elasticity of demand at any point we have to draw the tangent to the given point and then finding out the value by lower segment upper segment .
Total Expenditure Method Theorem 1: When price elasticity of demand is equal to unity (ep=1), the total expenditure remains the same with the fall or rise in price Suppose TE1 is the expenditure before the Change in price and TE2 represents the total expenditure after the change in price       1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 0 0 .
.
1 .
.
.
.
.
.
1 TE TE TE TE Q P P Q ep As PQ P Q TE TE So ignored be can quantity small is Q P Since PQ Q P Q P P Q PQ TE TE PQ Q Q P P TE TE Q Q P P TE Q P TE q p p q Given                                            Price Qty TE 10 15 150 5 30 150 30 5 150 Theorem 2: When price elasticity of demand is greater than one (ep>1),the total expenditure will increase with the fall in price and will decrease with the rise in price 1 2 1 2 1 2 0 0 .
.
1 .
.
1 TE TE TE TE Q P P Q being ep Q P P Q TE TE that proved have We Q P P Q Given                   Price Qty TE 10 15 150 5 40 200 30 4 120 Theorem 3: When price elasticity of demand is less than one(ep<1) , the total expenditure will decrease with the fall in price and will increase with the rise in price.
1 2 1 2 1 2 0 0 .
.
1 .
.
1 : TE TE TE TE Q P P Q ep Q P P Q TE TE know We Q P P Q ep Given                   Price Qty TE 10 15 150 5 20 100 30 10 300 Revenue Method: Mrs. Joan Robinson has given this method she says that elasticity of demand can be measured with the help of average revenue and marginal revenue.
The formula to measure elasticity of demand is Ep = A A M  A = average revenue M = Marginal revenue Arc Elasticity of Demand Arc elasticity is the elasticity of one variable with respect to another between two given points.
It is used when there is no general function to define the relationship between the two variables.
Arc elasticity is also defined as the elasticity between two points on a curve.
The concept is used in both mathematics and economics.
            2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 2 2 q q p p p q q q p p p q p p p q q q p p p q q q p p p q q q ep                                              Income Elasticity of Demand Income elasticity of demand shows the degree of responsiveness of quantity demanded of a good to a small change in the income of consumers.
10 30 25 102 100 2 1 1                 i i e q q Y Y q Y Y q Y Y q q Y Y q q e Cross Elasticity of Demand It is the ratio proportionate change in the quantity demanded of Y to a given proportionate change in the price of the related commodity X.
It is a measure of relative change in the quantity demanded of a commodity due to a change in the price of its substitute.
x y y x y y x x y y x x c q p p q p p q q p p q q e            Numerical example.
You have given the demand function Qx =10 - 6Px +12Py - 4Pz + 10A Calculate elasticity of demand if price is Rs 800 and quantity demanded is 1200 units.
There is inverse relationship between quantity demanded, So the law of demand states that other thing remaining constant more is demanded at lower price and less is demanded in at higher price.
Price elasticity of demand shows the degree of responsiveness in change in quantity demanded due to change in price.
In the above demand function only price will change other factors will remain constant.
Price is = 800 Quantity demanded is 1200 Ed = -6(800) 1200 Ed = -4800 1200 Ed = -4 The minus sign indicates inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded, so elasticity of demand is 4.
Example: Demand for a firm product has been estimated to be Qd = 1000 - 200P If Price of product is Rs 3, find out Price elasticity of Demand  400 3 200 5 .
1 400 3 200 400 ) 3 ( 200 1000               ep or ep q p p q ep Qd Example: The price elasticity of demand for color TV is estimated to be -2.5.
If the price of the color is reduced by 20%, how much percentage increase in the quantity of color TVs sold do you expect.
1% change in price lead to 2.5% change in quantity demanded If the price is reduced by 20% the demand will increase by 50 Example: Studies in United states of America indicate that price elasticity of demand for Cigarette is 0.4.If a pack of cigarette currently cost $2 and the govt.
wants to reduce smoking by 20 percent how much should it increase price.
ice changeinpr x ice changeinpr demanded inquantity change ep % 50 % % 20 4 .
0 % %   The following demand functions for readymade trousers has been estimated Q = 2000 +1.5Y -5.5P Where Y is income in thousands of rupees.
Q is the quantity demanded in units and P is the price per unit When P= Rs 150 and Y= Rs.15,000 Determine price elasticity and Income elasticity of demand 23675 ) 15000 ( 5.1 23675 ) 150 ( 5.5 23675 825 22500 2000 ) 150 ( 5.5 ) 000 , 15 ( 5.1 2000           ei ep ep ep ep Example: The demand curve is given by Qd = 500-5Px + 0.5I +10Py-2Pz where Qd = Quantity demanded of good X Px = Price of good X I = Consumer Income Py = Price of good Y Pz = Price of good Z Based on the demand curve above, is X a normal or an inferior good?
Based on the demand curve above, what is the relationship between good X and good Z Based on the demand curve above, what is the relationship between good X and good Z What is the equation of the demand curve if consumer incomes are Rs 30,000, the price of good Y is Rs 10 , and the price of good Z is Rs 20.
Law of supply .Supply refers to the amount of a commodity offered by a seller at a particular price per unit of time.
Whenever we speak of supply in economics, we refer to the various amount of a commodity during a given period of time.
According to MC Connel "supply may be defined as a schedule which shows the various amounts of a product which a particular seller is willing and able to produce and make available for of possible prices during same given period.
The quantity of a commodity that firms will be able and willing to offer for sale in the market depends on several factors.
The important factors determining supply of commodity are 1.
The price of the commodity 2.
The prices of inputs 3.
The state of technology 4.
The number of firms producing and selling the commodity 5.
The prices of related goods produced 6.
Future expectations regarding prices These supply function of a commodity is written as s x Q =S(Px, F1, F2…….Fx) Supply schedule : A supply schedule is a tabular representation of the date on the quantity supplied by the manufactures to the market at various prices.
INDIVIDUAL SUPPLY SCHEDULE Price Amount Supplied 1 10 3 20 4 30 5 40 6 60 The table shows that when the price of the commodity rises the supply of the commodity increases and vice versa.
Supply Curve : Supply curve is the graphical representation of the supply schedule.
The market supply curve summarizes the total quantity producers are willing and able to produce at different alternate prices holding other factors such as competition technology, government, taxes etc, that affect supply as constant.
Each point on the supply curve shows the minimum price at which the firm would be prepared to receive for different quantity of product.
The following figure shows the supply curve.
In the fig.3.1 SS is the supply curve.
The curve Slopes upwards from left to the right.
This shows the direct relationship between quantity supplied and price.
Law of supply : Other things remaining constant, as the price of a commodity rises, the supply is extended and as the price falls supply is contrasted".
This means that when the price rises, the quantity of commodity produced and offered for sale will increase and when price falls, the quantity of the commodity offered for sale will decrease.
So the relationship between supply and price is direct.
Supply Schedule : The law of supply can be represented with the help of a table given below Tabel2 Price /kg Quantity supplied 10 50 15 70 20 90 25 100 30 110 The schedule represents the prices and quantities offered for sale.
As the price of the commodity per kg rises from Rs.10 to Rs.15 the quantity supplied increases from 50kg to 110kg.
this can be shown in the following fig 4.2.
FIGURE Fig 4.2 In the fig 4.2 OX, axis measures the quantity supplied and OY axis measures the price.
The curve SS is the supply curve.
It slopes upwards to the right showing expansions of supply for a rise in prices.
Limitation of the law : Though the case of upward sloping curve is true in all cases, it has its limitation.
(a) The law of supply does not apply to rare articles like ancient paintings, coins etc.
As the supply of these commodities are fixed their supply can't be increased whenever there is increase in price.
(b) The law of supply does not held good to specification - "Bull" and "Bears".
They sale less and more at higher and lower prices respectively in anticipation of profit.
(c) If the seller is need if hardcore he will like to see his stock at the lower price.
(d) The law also does not operate when a seller want to sell his old stock.
Here he sells more in the market by lowering the price.
(e) When a seller want to close his business he sells more even at lower price.
Shifts in supply : Increase in supply and decrease in supply.
An upward shift in supply curve irrespective of any change in price is called increase in supply.
Increase in supply refer to more supply at the same price.
On the contrary, if the same amount is supplied at a higher prices or less is supplied at same price, supply is said to be decreased.
Increase in supply : Increase in supply refers to more supply at same price or same supply at less price.
This increase in supply is of two types.
Same price more supply : If the supplier sells more commodity at the same price is called the increase in supply at same price.
This is shown in the table given below.
TABLE INCREASE IN SUPPLY Price Quantity Supplied 5 10 5 15 5 20 Less price same supply : In the above table when price is Rs.5 the quantity supplied is 10 units.
If price falls to 4 the quantity supplied remain same (10units).
It is called same supply at less price.
This can be explained in the diagram given below: FIGURE Fig 4.3 In the figure 3.3 SS is the initial supply curve.
Initially when price was Rs.5 the supplier was supplying 10 units.
The price has remained constant but the supply is 15 units.
There is shift of supply curve from SS to S1S1.
In the same situation even though the price has come down to 4 but the quantity supplied has remain constant.
Decrease in supply : Decrease in supply refers to less supply at same price and same supply at high price.
It is also of two types.
DECREASE IN SUPPLY Price Supply Same price less 5 15 5 10 More price 5 15 6 15 Same price less supply : In the table when price is 5, the quantity supplied is 15 units, if price remains Rs.5 quantity supplied falls to 10 units is called less supply at same price.
On the other hand in same situation when the price of the commodity is Rs.5 the quantity supplied is 15, if the prices increased to 6 the quantity supplied is also same 15 units.
This is shown in the diagram below.
FIGURE Fig 4.4 In this diagram when the price was OP the quantity supplied was OQ.
The price has remained constant, the supply is reduced to OQ.
This is known as decrease in supply at the same price.
In the second case the price has gone up to OP, but the quantity supplied has remain constant that is OQ.
This is known as more price and same supply.
Factors determining supply :As the law of supply states other thing remaining constant quantity supplied varies directly with price of the product.
However the supply depends not only on the price of a product but on several other factors too.
It should be remembered that in economic theory where as the effect of changes in a price of a product on the quantity supplied of it is depicted and explained by movement along a given supply schedule or curve, of other factors is represented by the changes or shift of the entire supply schedule or supply curve.
The factors other than price which determine supply are the following.
Production technology : The change in technology significantly affects the supply function by acting the cost of production.
If there occurs an improvement in production technology used by the firm its production efficiency increases which reduces the unit cost of production.
So when there is less cost of production the supply curve would shift to right.
Price of inputs : Changing in prices of factors or inputs used in production also cause a change in cost of produced and consequently bring about a change in supply.
Price of the related goods : Supply of a commodity is also influenced by the price of related goods in the market.
If the price of the substitute goes up producers are intended to direct their resources to the production of the substitute commodity.
New Inventions.
: Generally development of technology and new inventions helps to raise productivity and thus help to raise the supply function.
Natural factor : The favorable natural factors help to boost the production while unfavorable condition hinders it and supply is adversely affected.
Number of producers : If the number of firms producing a product increases, the market supply of the product will increase causing a right hand shift in the supply curve.
When in the short run firm in an industry are making large profits, the new firms enter the industry in long run and consequently the total quantity and the total production and supply of the product of the industry increases.
Future expectations : Finally future expectations regarding the increase in price also hampers the supply of the commodity.
If as happen during inflationary periods sellers expect the price to rise in future they would reduce current supply of a product in the market and would instead hoards the commodity.
The hoarding of huge quantities of good by traders is an important factor in reducing their supplies.
Taxes and subsidies : Taxes and subsidies also influenced the supply of a product.
If an excise duty or sales tax is levied on a product, the firm will supply the same amount it at a higher price or less quantity of it at the same price.
This is because excise duty on a commodity is included in price by the sellers to pass it on to the buyers.
This implies that imposition of a sales tax or excise duty will cause a leftward shift in the supply curve.
On the other hand, when government provides subsidy on a commodity it will reduce the supply price of a commodity.
This implies that grant of subsidy on a commodity will cause the supply curve to shift to the right.
Elasticity of supply : Elasticity of supply means the rate at which the supply of a product changes to the exchange in the price.
Es = Proportionate change in the quantity supplied Proportionate change in price = s s s s q q p p q p q p       Es = s s q p p q    P = original price qs = original quantity supplied p = change in price qs = change in quantity supplied The elasticity of supply can be classified in to five types.
1.
Perfectly elasticity of supply : If at a fixed price, the quantity supplied increases or reduces to any extent, it means supply is perfectly elastic.
Fig 4.5 The figure 3.5 shows the price perfectly elastic supply.
At OP price the quantity supplied may be oq, oq, oq2.
Perfectly inelastic supply : In case of perfectly inelasticity of supply the quantity supplied remain constant whatever may be the price.
The supply curve is vertical to the OX axis.
The value of elasticity of supply is zero.
It is shown in the following figure 3.6.
Fig 4.6 3.
Unitary elasticity of supply : In case of unitary elasticity of supply the degree at which price changes the quantity supplied also changes at the same degree.
The value of elasticity of represents unitary elasticity of supply.
Here we find that at OP price the supply is oq and at op1 price the supply is oq1 .
Here p = q Fig 4.7 4.
More elasticity of supply : When a small change in price bring a greater change in the supply.
The value of elasticity of supply is greater than one.
In the figure at op price, the quantity supplied is oq.
When price rises from OP to OP1 then the quantity supplied increases from oq to oq1.
Here pp1 < qq1.
The supply curve is flatter one..
Fig 4.8 5.
Less elasticity supply : When there is a big change in price but change in quantity supplied is very small it is called less elastic supply In the figure p > q.
It shows a big change in price while their is a small change in the quantity supplied.
Theory of production, Law of variable proportion, Laws of returns to scale, Cost Concepts, Total Costs, Fixed cost, Variable cost, Revenue concepts, Total revenue, Average revenue and marginal revenue, Market (Forms of market), Perfect Competition, Determination of price under perfect competition, Linear Break-even Analysis.
Theory of production In economics the production means a process by which resources are transformed in to a different more useful commodity or service.
In general production means transforming inputs in to an output.
The relationship between inputs and output of a firm has been called the production function.
Algebraically production function can be written as Q = f ( L,K,M) Where Q = Output K = Capital M = Raw material The production function states the maximum quantity of output that can be produced with any given quantities of various inputs.
In economic theory we have two types of production function.
One is called short run production function and the second one is called long run production function.
In the short run some inputs such as land and capital are constant and the quantity of one input such as labor is varied, we can write Q = f (L, K).
In the long run we can vary all inputs.
The stuffy of short run production function is the subject matter of the law of variable proportion.
The study of long run production function is called law of return to scale.
Concept of Product.
Three main concepts of production are (a) Total Product (b) Marginal Product (c) Average product Total product .
Total product of a factor is the amount of total output produced by a given amount of the factor., other factors held constant.
Average product.
Average product of a factor is the total output produced per unit of the factor per unit of the factor employed.
Thus Average Product = Total Product Number of Unit of a factor employed We can also express this as AP = Q L Q stands for the total product and L stands for Labour AP stands for Average product.
Marginal Product.
Marginal product is the addition to the total product when one employ one additional variable facor..
Mathematically if employment of labor increases by ∆L units which yield an increase in total output by ∆Q units, the marginal physical product of labor is given by Q L   .
That is L Q MP L    .
Law of variable Proportion The law of variable proportions is an important law in the theory of production.
This law has played a vital role in the history of economic theory.
The law of variable proportions in the new name for the famous 'law of diminishing return of classical economics.
This law examines the production function with one factor variable, keeping other factor fixed.
When the quantity of one factor is varied, keeping the quantity of the other factors constant, the proportion between the variable factor and fixed factor is altered, the ratio of employment of the variable factor to that of fixed factor goes on increasing as the quantity of the variable factor is increased.
According to F.Benham "As the proportion of one factor in a combination of factor is increased, after a point, first the marginal and then average product of that factors will diminish."
According to Marshall "An increase in the capital and labor applied in the cultivation of land causes in general a less than proportionate increase in the amount of product raised unless it happens to coincide with an improvement in the arts of agriculture".
The law held good under several conditions.
a.
The state of technology is assumed to be given and unchanged.
b. Secondly there must be some outputs whose quantity is kept fixed.
c. Thirdly the law is based upon the possibility of varying the proportions in which the factors can be combined to produce a product.
The law is not applicable where the factor must be used in fixed proportion to yield a product The law can be explained with help of a table and diagram Table Units of Labor Total Product Marginal Product Average Product Stages 1 80 80 80 1st Stage Increasing Return 2 170 90 85 3 270 100 90 4 368 98 92 5 430 62 86 2nd Stage Diminishing Return 6 480 50 80 7 504 24 72 8 504 0 63 9 495 -9 55 3rd Stage Negative Return 10 480 -15 48 Stage-I: The stage I shows increase in total output to a point at an increasing rate.
TP increases to the point F. As the slope of the total product curve increase marginal product rises.
But from point F onwards the total product increases at a diminishing rate and so marginal product falls but it is positive.
The point F is called the point of inflexion up to which TP increases.
The stage I ends when average product at its highest point.
Though in the first stage marginal product first rises and then falls but average product rises all over.
In the first stage the quantity of fixed factor is too much in relation to the variable factor.
If we withdraw some of the fixed factor the total production will not hampered.
So in the first stage marginal product of the fixed factor is negative.
Stage I is known as the stage of increasing return Stage II- So far as the stage II is concerned total product increases at a diminishing rate.
The second stage ends where we reach at the point H. In this stage both marginal product and average product declines but they are positive.
When stage II ends the marginal product becomes zero.
The second stage is known as stage of diminishing return Stage III- In stage III TP curve slopes downward.
That leads to marginal product to be negative and MP curve goes below X-axis.
In this stage variable factor in relation to fixed factor is negative.
So this stage is called the stage of negative return The rational stage of production.
Now the question is in which stage a rational producer will choose to produce.
A rational producer will never produce in stage 3 as the marginal product of the variable factor is negative.
So the producer can always increase his output by reducing variable factor.
Even if the variable factor is free a rational producer stop at the end of the second stage where the marginal product of the variable factor is zero.
A rational producer will also never seek to produce in stage 1.
Because here the marginal product of the fixed factor is negative.
In this stage fixed factor are not utilized properly to its capacity.
So due to increase in variable factor average product to rise.
So a rational producer will expand his production.
Even if the fixed factor is free the rational producer will stop at the stage one.
where the marginal product to the fixed factor is zero.
So the stage 1 and stage 3 are known as economic absurdity or economic nonsense.
Thus stage 1 and 3 represent non-economic region of production.
Increasing return operates due to indivisibility of fixed factor.
In the beginning the quantity of fixed factor is abundant relative to the quantity of variable factor.
Therefore, when more and more of variable factor are added to the constant quantity of the fixed factor, it is utilized more efficiently.
This causes the production to increase at a rapid rate.
The question arises as to why fixed factor is not initially taken in a quantity which suits the availability quantity of the variable factor.
Answer to the question is provided by the fact that generally those factors are taken as fixed which are indivisible.
The second reason why we get increasing return at the initial stage is that as more units of the variable factors are employed the efficiency of the variable factor itself increases.
The greater the quantity of variable input the scope for specialization and hence greater will be the level of productivity.
After increasing returns there starts diminishing returns.
Increasing returns occurs in the first stage because of more and efficient use of fixed factor.
Once the point is reached at which the amount of the variable factor is sufficient to ensure the utilization of the fixed factor than further increase in variable factor led to marginal and average product to decline.
This is due to fixed factor becomes inadequate to the variable factor According to Joan Robinson factors of production are imperfect substitute.
Diminishing returns occurs during the second stage since the fixed factor is more inadequate to the variable factor.
Now a factor which is scarce in supply is taken as fixed.
When a factor is scarce it is generally can't incurred in accordance with the varying quantity of other factors, which result in diminishing return.
If now there is availability of factor which is perfect substitute of the scarce fixed factor there will be no second stage of production.
The phenomenon of negative return in stage 3 takes place due to the fact that the number of the variable factor seems too excessive relative to the fixed factor so that the total output falls instead of rising Law of Return to Scale The law of return to scale constitutes an integral part of the law of production.
In the long run the output can be increased by changing all factors of production.
In the long run all the factors are variable.
The law of return to scale, refer to the effects of scale relationship.
In the long run output may be increased by changing all factors by the same proportion or by different proportion.
Traditional theory of production concentrate on the first case, that is the study of output as all inputs change by the same proportion.
The term 'return to scale' refers to the changes in output as all factors change by the same proportion.
Suppose we start from initial level output X0 = f(l, k) and we increase all the factors by same proportion k, we will clearly obtain a new level of output X*, higher than original level X. X* = f(kL, kK) If X* increases by the same proportion K as the inputs we say that there is constant return to scale.
If X* increases less than proportionally with the increase in the factors, we have decrease return to scale.
If X* increases more than proportionally with increase in the factors have increasing return to scale.
Increasing return to scale: The law of increasing return to scale operates when we increase the factor at a given rate than the output increases more than that rate.
Suppose we increase the factor of production by two times it leads to an increase in output by more than two times.
Conversely in other words the law of increasing return to scale operates, when output is increases by two times by increasing in scale or increasing labor and capital by less than 2 times.
This can be presented in the diagram given below.
    0 2 2 90 2 2 2 In the figure we find BC AB OA Given AB OA AB OA OA OA OB OA OB OA By taking OAL and OBM triangle we find OLA OMB AOL BOM Common Angle OAL OBM So OM BM OB OL AL OA OB OA OM OL OM OL                    Constant Return to scale     0 2 2 90 2 2 2 In the figure we find BC AB OA Given AB OA AB OA OA OA OB OA OB OA By taking OAL and OBM triangle we find OLA OMB AOL BOM Common Angle OAL OBM So OM BM OB OL AL OA OB OA OM OL OM OL                    Decreasing Return to scale     0 2 2 90 2 2 2 In the figure we find BC AB OA Given AB OA AB OA OA OA OB OA OB OA By taking OAL and OBM triangle we find OLA OMB AOL BOM Common Angle OAL OBM So OM BM OB OL AL OA OB OA OM OL OM OL                    Causes of operation to scale : The increasing return to scale operates due to the following factors (a) internal economics (b)Internal diseconomies(b) external economies (c) dimensional economies Internal economics refer to the advantage enjoyed by the firm due to increase in its scale.
It consists of labor economics, economies due to indivisibilities of machines and technical economies, managerial economies and marketing economics.
In the long run on there is increase in work forces it leads to specialization of labor and division of labor.
It increases the efficiency of workers.
So there is increase in production, output increases at an increasing rate.
According to Joan Robinson and Kaldor, there are certain factor they can't be used fully if the output is small.
To produce small amount of output these factors can't be divided.
So, when there is increase in output, the machines are fully utilized and there is increasing return to scale.
When a firm is small one manager has to perform of all odd jobs.
But as the size of the business expands, different managers are appointed for different work.
This promotes efficiency and production.
When firm becomes bigger in size its importance increases importance increase, as a result it is able to secure resources more quickly and cheaply than the small firm.
When a firm becomes bigger it can buy raw materials in larger quantities from cheaper markets and can sell finished products in the national and international market easily and at high prices.
Thus, marketing cost is less in case of big firms.
External economics refers to the benefits employed by a firm due to growth of other firms in an industry.
External economics leads to availability of spare time, easy availability of labor and development of transport facilities, which increases the production at an increasing rate.
The most common causes are decreasing return to management.
The management in responsible for the co-ordination of the activities of various sections of the firm.
Even if some decisions are taken by some of the managers but most important decision are taken by the board of directors.
As the output increases top management becomes overburdened and hence less efficient in its role as co-coordinator and ultimate decisions maker.
So this delay in production.
Another cause for decreasing return may be paucity of natural resources, which may increase the prices of raw materials.
It will lead to reduction in production.
Whether there is decreasing return to scale or increasing return to scale it depends upon the strength of the internal economies and internal diseconomies.
It also depends on the strength of external economies and external diseconomies.
If the strength of economies is greater than the diseconomies there is increasing return to scale and if strength of diseconomies is greater than the economies there is decreasing return to scale.
Theory Of Costs Cost means the amount of resources which we sacrifice for the production of the commodity.
There are two types of cost-function (short-run and long-run).
In the short-run we have two types of cost.
They are fixed cost and variable cost Total cost = Total Fixed Cost + Total variable cost.
Total Fixed Cost is independent of output.
Whatever may the output the total cost remain constant.
This is also called as indirect cost.
Machinery cost, equipments cost etc.
Variable Cost: Total variable cost (TVC): Total variable cost is otherwise called as direct cost, as they are directly related with the production.
Total Costs: Total Cost : TFC + TVC, TC = K+ L.w.
Total cost curve never start from the origin Average Fixed Cost and Average Variable Costs Average Fixed Cost: (AFC)= TFC/Q.
Average Variable Cost : (AVC) :         AP w AVC AP w AVC L AP w L AVC Q TVC AVC 1 .
.
Average Cost: AVC AFC AC Q TVC Q TFC AC Q TVC TFC AC Q TC AC        Marginal Cost: 1 1             n n n n n n n TVC TVC MCn Q TC MC Q TC MC TC TC MC Example: ]   2 3 2 3 2 2 3 2 04 .
0 9 .
0 10 04 .
0 9 .
0 10 04 .
0 9 .
0 10 12 .
0 8 .
1 10 04 .
0 9 .
0 10 1000 cos Q Q AVC Q Q Q Q Q TVC AVC Q Q Q TVC Q Q MC Q TC AVC and MC Find Q Q Q TC function t total the Given                     Market Market is generally understood to a particular place or locality where goods are sold and purchased.
Economist understand by the term market not any particular market place in which things are bought and sold but the whole of any region in which buyers and sellers are in such free intercourse with one another that the price of same good tend to equality easily and quickly.
The essential of the market are (a) commodity which is dealt with (b) the existence of buyer and seller (c) place, be it certain region a country or the entire world and (d) such communication between buyers and sellers that only are price should prevail for the same commodity at the same time.
Main market function : The market can be divide into different form based on the number of firms, the nature of product produced by them and price elasticity of demand.
Main market forms are 1.
Perfect competitive market 2.
Monopolistic 3.
Monopoly 4.
Oligopoly Features of Perfect Competition  Many Buyers and Sellers - There will always be a huge number of buyers and sellers in this form of marketplace.
The advantage of having a large number of small-sized producers is that they cannot combine to influence the market price.
If the quantity offered by an individual seller is very small compared to the total market produce, they cannot influence the market price independently.
Similarly, if there are many buyers, then an individual will not have the power to dictate conditions to the market or influence the price by altering demand for a product.
The individual demand will not be large enough to change the price.
 Homogeneity - The product or service produced by the buyers in a perfectly competitive market should be homogenous in all respects.
There should be no differentiation between them in terms of quantity, size, taste, etc., so that the products are perfect substitutes for each other.
If a seller tries to charge a higher price for products that are so similar, they will lose their customers immediately.
 Free Entry and Exit - Another condition of a perfectly competitive market is that no artificial restrictions prevent a firm's entry, or compel an existing firm to stay put when they want to leave.
Their decision to enter, stay or leave the market depends purely on economic factors.
 Perfect Knowledge - The buyers and sellers have perfect knowledge about the market conditions.
The buyers are aware of the details of the product sold as well as its price.
At the same time, the sellers know about the potential sales of their products at different price points.
Since the buyers are already informed about the product, there is no need for advertising or sales promotion.
So firms don't have to invest a single penny in these activities.
It also helps sellers save on advertising or other marketing activities, which keeps the price of their products low.
 Mobility of Factors of Production - The factors of production like labour, raw materials and capital should have total mobility under perfect competition.
The labour should have the freedom to move from one place (industry, market or production unit) to another depending on their remuneration.
Even the raw materials and capital should not have any restrictions in movement.
 Transport Cost - In the perfectly competitive market, the costs for transporting goods, services or factors of production from one place to another is either zero or constant for all sellers.
The assumption is that all sellers are equally near or farther away from the market.
Thus, the transport cost is uniform for all of them.
The result is that the overall costs for production and the selling price are the same across the board.
 Absence of Artificial Restrictions - There is no interference from the government or any other regulatory body to hinder the smooth functioning of the perfect competition.
There are no controls or restrictions over the supply or pricing and the price can change solely based on the demand and supply conditions.
 Uniform Price - There is a single uniform price for all products and services in a perfectly competitive market.
The forces of demand and supply determine it.
Conclusion Perfect competition is one of the most smoothly functioning markets, with many buyers and sellers working together in total harmony.
Unfortunately, it is a hypothetical situation that does not exist in reality.
But markets should aim to be as close as possible to this form of market to ensure a fair price for all goods and service Determination of Price Under perfect Competition Under perfect competition, there are large number of firms producing homogeneous commodity.
An individual firm in such a market can't affect the price of a commodity.
Under perfect competition a firm is price taker not price maker.
So the demand curve of the firm is perfectly elastic.
Before Alfred Marshall there was a dispute among earlier economist as to whether it is supply of a good or the demand for it that determine its price.
There were two schools of thought one school thought believed that it is cost of production, that is the force working on the supply side, which determine the price, The other school of thought held the view that it is the elasticity or demand that determine the price of the product.
But each school of thought took one sided view of the pricing problem.
The credit of finding the free answer to the pricing problem goes to Marshall who held that both demand and supply were equally important in determining the price of a product Dr. Marshall …pronounced that the price in determined by the intersection of demand and supply.
According to him, the point where demand equate supply is called equilibrium price.
A.
Demand Side : Under perfectly competitive market there are large number of buyers.
The Marshalian law of demand guides the buyers making their purchases.
From the demand theorem we know more quantities of a good are demanded at less price and vice versa other things remaining constant.
The fig.1 shows the demand curve which slopes upward from left to right.
Supply side : Under perfect competition there are large number of sellers producing a homogeneous product.
The amount supplied by a single seller at each possible price at a time is found from his supply curve.
The supply curve generally slopes upward from left to right indicating more is supplied at lower price and less is supplied at lower price.
In the fig.4.2curve has SS in the market supply law.
Equilibrium of demand and supply : The equilibrium price of a commodity is determined by the intersection of the market demand curve and the market supply curve.
This can be explained by the help of an illustration.
TABLE Price Quantity demanded Quantity supplied 5 12 1 10 10 4 15 8 4 20 6 6 25 4 8 30 2 10 35 1 12 In the table the equilibrium price is Rs.20.
It is because this is the price where the quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied.
Once the equilibrium price prevails in the market, there will be no tendency for it to change.
Now suppose the price in the market is Rs.25, the buyer would demand only 4 units and where as seller are ready to supply 8 units.
For this there will be competition among the seller to sell more unit.
This process will continue, till the equilibrium price is reach, On the other hand if the price falls below the equilibrium level say Rs.15, the buyers will demand 8 units while the sellers will supply 4 units.
So there will be competition among the consumer to consume more and it raises the price again.
This can be also explained with the help of diagram given below.
In the graphical terms, the equilibrium between demand and supply is depicted in the figure where DD is the demand curve slopping down and SS is the supply curve slopping upward.
Demand and supply are in equilibrium at price E where two curve intersect to each other.
It means that only at price OP, the quantity demanded is equal to quantity supplied OM is the equilibrium quantity.
If price is greater than equilibrium price say OP" the quantity demanded by the buyer is P"L while the quantity offered to supply by seller is P"k. Thus LK is excess supply which the buyer will not take off from the market at price OP".
In order to dispose of their excess supply, the sellers will compete with each other and in doing so they will bring down the price.
Thus there will be tendency for the price to fall to the level of equilibrium price OP.
At price OP', which is less than equilibrium price, the buyer demand P'T, the sellers are prepared to supply only P'H.
HT represents excess demand.
The unsatisfied buyers will compete with each other.
So there will be tendency for the price to fall to the level of equilibrium price OP.
At price OP', which is less than equilibrium, the buyers demand P'T, the sellers are prepared to supply only P'H.
HT represents excess demand.
The unsatisfied buyers will compete with each other.
Thus there will be tendency for the price to rise to the level of equilibrium price.
Changes in equilibrium : The equilibrium price and quantity will change as a result of shift either in demand curve or supply curve or both.
Effect of shift in demand : Supply remaining constant if there is change in demand there will be change in equilibrium price.
The demand condition may change due to several factors.
Like change in income preference of the people, the availability of substitute goods etc.
This results in the demand curve to shift to left or to right.
This can be explained in the diagram given below.
In the figure 4.4 OP is the equilibrium price and OQ is the equilibrium quantity demanded and supplied.
Now suppose supply remaining constant the demand increases from DD to D1D1.
The new demand curve intersect the supply curve at point E1, the quantity demand goes up to OX, and the new equilibrium price is OP1.
In the same fashion if there is shift of demand curve to the left that is from DD to D2D2 we have a new equilibrium price OP2.
Effect of shift is supply : Demand remaining constant if there is change in supply there will be change in equilibrium price.
Supply condition may change as a result of change in cost of production.
This is shown in the diagram given below.
In the figure the equilibrium price is OP and OQ is the equilibrium quantity.
Now if demand remaining constant, supply curve shift to the left we have new equilibrium price which is more than the old equilibrium price OP.
In the same fashion if there is increase in supply, the supply curve will shift to the right.
We have new supply curve S1S1.
We have new equilibrium point, the price is OP2 which is less than OP.
Effect of simultaneous change in demand and supply on equilibrium price : Sometimes both supply and demand may change simultaneously.
The simultaneous effect of change in demand and supply an equilibrium price has been explained in the following figures.
In figure both demand and supply change in the same preparation.
So the equilibrium price remains the same.
But the quantity produced and sold increased from OQ1 to OQ2.
In figure the preparation in which the quantity demanded has changed the quantity supplied has changed at a lesser proposition.
The equilibrium price is OP1 and the quantity produce in OQ2 Time element in the theory of price determination.
Prof. Marshall propounded that price is determined by the demand and supply of a commodity.
But he had given great importance to the time element in the theory of price.
Marshall has divided the time in to four parts: 1.
Market period : Market period is otherwise known as very short period.
The supply curve is perfectly inelastic.
It is only the demand which influences the price in a very short period.
This is shown in the diagram given below.
In this figure 4.8 MPS is the market period supply curve which is perfectly inelastic.
OP is the equilibrium price.
If demand increases the price increases from OP to OP1.
In the same manner if there is reduction in demand the price comes down from OP to OP2.
Short Period : The short period is that period in which some adjustment regarding supply can be done.
In the short run the supply can be increased by changing variable factors.
In other words the short period is that period in which supply of commodity can be increased up to its existing capacity of production.
In the short run both the demand and supply influence the price determination but the part played by demand is more than the supply.
The supply curve is less elastic.
This can be shown in the following diagram.
In the following figure OP was the equilibrium price.
Suppose there is an increase in demand and it leads to shift of demand curve from DD to D1D1, the market period price is OP2 and the short run price is OP1.
Market period price is more than the short period price.
It is because in very short period there can't be any adjustment to the supply but in the short run some adjustment can be made.
Long period : Long period is that period in which the supply of the commodity can be increased or decreased according to the situations.
In case of long run supply play an important role in determining the price.
The long run price is known as normal price.
This can be also shown in the following diagram.
FIGURE 5.10 In this figure, market period price is OP1, short period price is OP2 and the long period price is OP3.
Long run price is less than the short run price and market period price.
Very long period : Very long period is that price of time in which basic changes can be affected in both demand and supply.
The price which is determined in the very long period is called seller price.
Break-even Analysis Break-even analysis is also known as cost-volume profit analysis.
Break- even analysis is widely used for financial studies because of its simplicity and applicability.
Breakeven analysis focus on cost-volume profit relations that hold only over a short run.
Break-even analysis is like a medical check-up.
The physical examination reveals the current state of health and provides clues about what should be done to become or stay healthy.
The break-even analysis established the relationship between costs, volume and profits.
With a given change in costs and/or volume, what is the expected change in profits?
While volume is a function of price, cost is a function of volume.
The break-even technique analyses the behaviour of the three key parameters of costs, volume and profits.
Break even analysis finds out the point at which revenues and cost are exactly equal.
This point is known as break-even point.
It is defined as the output level which evenly break-even the cost and revenues.
The BE point shows the position where the expenses almost coincide the revenues such that there are neither profits nor losses.
At this specific level of activity, the sales just cover the total costs, and the profits are zero.
Graphical presentation of break-even analysis Break-even analysis can be presented graphically.
It serves as the third approach to its study.
The graph so emerging is called break-even chart.
It can be defined as the graphical representation of the cost structure of a business.
Such a chart portrays: (a) Likely profits or losses at different levels of output.
(b) The relationship between marginal cost and fixed cost.
(c) The margin of safety.
(d) The angle of incidence indicating the rate at which profit is earned.
(e) The break-even point i.e., the point at which the total cost line and sales line intersect - a point of the profit and loss.
(f) On a properly designed chart, the contribution and the P/V ratio may be shown.
Y Profit - Angle of incidence ^Variable cost Output and sales x In fig OX axis represent output and sales, OY axis represent costs and revenue.
The fixed cost line is drawn first starting from an approximate point as X Y - axis.
The variable costs shown in the chart by super imposing it on the fixed cost line.
The total cost line is drawn above the fixed cost line.
The revenue (sales) line start from origin and extends to the point of maximum or any other sales value.
The point where sales and total cost lines intersect is the break-even point.
The point represents the volume at which TR = TC.
Volumes lower than break-even result in operating loss because TR < TC.
Volumes higher than break-even result in operating profit because TR > TC.
If the break-even point appears well over to the right of the chart, the margin of safety is low.
The cause may be that either (a) The amount of fixed overhead is too great for the amount of sales being achieved, (b) The direct and variable cost are high and the contribution is low.
If the break-even point is over to left of the chart, and is coupled with a large angle of incidence, it means that the road is open to a large expansion of output.
It is just here that much care must be exercised because an increased production will have to be sold and perhaps this can be achieved only by a reduction of price.
Formula: Break-even point (in unit) = Break even sales= Contribution = Selling Price - Variable Cost Contribution = Fixed Cost + Profit Targeted Volume to get desired amount of Profit= Targeted Sales to get desired amount of Profit= Example: A company produces fan.
An analysis of their accounting reveals.
Variable cost per fan = Rs.
100 Fixed cost = Rs.
1,00,000 Capacity = 2000 fan per year Selling price per fan = Rs.
200 Required (a) Find the break-even point.
(b) Find the number of fans to be sold to get a profit of Rs.
30,000 Solution 1.
BEP = Fixed cost/Contribution per unit = 1,00,000 100 100  (in quantity) 2.
Fans to be sold for desired profit of Rs.
30,000 Sales for desired profit = Fixedcost + desiredprofit Contributionperunit = 1,00,000 30,000 1300 100   fans should be sold Example: Fixed Expenses: Rs.
4,00,000 Materials: Rs 10 per unit Labour : Rs 5 per unit Fuel : Rs 3 per unit Carriage : Rs.
2 per unit Selling Price : Rs.
40 Find: a) Break-even point (unit) b) New BEP if selling price is reduced by 10% per unit.
Ans.
Break-even = New Break-even point= P/V Ratio P/V Ratio = = = Uses of P/V ratio Variable cost to given sales = Break-even Sales= = Targeted Sales to get desired amount of profit= Margin of Safety = Example: Find P/V ratio If fixed cost is Rs.
10,000 and break-even sales are Rs.
25,000 B/E.
Sales = = 25,000 = = 0.4 (40%) Example From the following data calculate a) P/V ratio a) Break-even point expressed in amount of sales in rupees b) How many units must be sold to earn a net income of 10% of sales Selling Price: Rs 20 per unit Variable cost : Rs 12 per unit Fixed cost : Rs.
2,40,000 Ans.
P/V ratio = Contribution/Sales = B.E.Sales= 2,40,000/0.40=6,00,000 Suppose x units are produced 20x= 12x+2,40,000 + 2x X= 40000units Example Given: Break-even point Rs.
30,000 Fixed Cost : Rs 6000 a) P/V ratio b) Sales to make a profit of Rs.1500 c) Variable cost to the actual sales Break-even Sales= = 30000 = = 0.20(20%) Sales to make a profit of Rs.1500 Variable cost to the actual sales = 30,000 (Variable Cost) Margin of Safety The margin of safety is the difference between the total sales (actual or projected) and the break-even sales.
It may be expressed in monetary terms or as a percentage of actual sales.
Margin of safety (Monetary terms) (M/S) = Actual Sales-Break-even sales Margin of safety (in percentage term) Actualsales Break-evensales 100 Actual sales    Margin of safety can also be calculated with the help of P/V ratio as under Margin of safety Profit = P Vratio The size of the margin of safety is an extremely valuable guide to the strength of a business.
If large, this means that there can be substantial falling off sales end yet a profit can still be made.
On the other hand, if the margin is small any loss of sales may be serious matter.
If the margin of safety is unsatisfactory, possible steps to rectify can be made by ensuring selling price.
Reducing fixed cost, reducing variable cost, increasing the volume of output etc.
Example: A company earned a profit of Rs.
50,000 during the year J 994-95.
If the marginal cost and selling price of a product are Rs.
10 and Rs.
15 per unit respectively, find out the amount of Margin of safety.
Solution Margin of safety = Profit/P/V ratio P/V ratio contribution 100 sales   Rs.5 100 33.33 Rs.15    Margin of safety Rs.
50,000 33.33% Rs.
150150.1502 Example: Sales (Rs.)
Profit (Rs.)
2016 1,20,000 8000 2017 1,40,000 13000 Find: a) P/V ratio b) B.E.Sales c) Profit when sales are Rs.
1,80,000 d) Sales required to earn a profit of Rs.
12,000 e) Margin of safety in 2016 Sales in 2016 is Rs 120,000 P/ratio is 25% 25% of 120000 is contribution 30000 (contribution) Profit in 2016 is Rs 8000 Contribution = Fixed Cost + profit Fixed Cost = 30000-8000 = 22000 Profit when sales are 1,80,000 Contribution 25 % of 180000 = 45,000 45000-22000 = 23000 (Profit) Sales required to earn a profit of Rs.
12,000 Margin of safety in 2016= 120000-88000 = 32000 Example Period Total Sales Total Cost 1 42500 38700 2 39200 36852 From the following data relating to a company calculate (a) Break-even sales (b) Sales required to earn a profit of Rs.
6,000 per period 56% of 42 500 is variable cost= 23800 Total cost = 38700 Fixed Cost = 38700-23800= 14900 = 33863 Sales required to earn a profit of Rs.
6,000 per period Q No1.
Konark Ltd. has annual capacity of 50,000 units.
If currently sells 40,000 units at a price of Rs.
105.
It has the following cost structure.
Rs.
Variable manufacturing cost per unit 45 Fixed manufacturing costs 800,000 Variable marketing and distribution cost per unit 10 Fixed Marketing and distribution costs 600,000 Find out it break-even point and marginal of safety (BPUT April 2005) Total fixed cost Rs.
800,000 + 600,000 = 14,00000 Variable cost per unit 45 + 10 = 55 Selling price per unit 105.
Break-even point 14,000 14,00000 28000 105 55 50    So the break-even quanity is 28,000 Break-even revenue 28,000 x 105 = Rs.
2940000 Marginal of safety = Actual Sales - Break-even sales Actual sales =4200000-2940000 = 1260000 (Revenue) In units = 40,000- 28,000 = 12,000 Q No 3.
Company X has an overall P/V ratio of 60% .If the Marginal cost of a certain product assessed as Rs 12.
What will be its selling price?
Q No 4.
Konark Ltd. provided the following information Fixed Cost = Rs 8000 Break-even Point = Rs 20,000 Variable cost = Rs 60 per unit Find P/V Ratio Profit when sales are Rs 40,000 New Break-even point if selling price is reduced by 10%.
Q No 5.
The following figures are available in respect of a concern Fixed Cost= Rs 1,20,000 Variable cost per unit Rs.
3.00 Selling price per unit Rs.
7.00 Determine P/V Ratio B.E.P Profit when the output is 50,000 units Profit with 10% increase in selling price.
Q No.
6 The following data are obtained from ABC Co. Ltd.
Sales = Rs.
1,00,000 Variable Cost= Rs.
60,000 Fixed Cost = Rs.
30,000 You are required to calculate: P/V ratio Break-even point Margin of Safety Break-even point when there is 20 percent increase in selling price.
Break-even point when there is 10% decrease in Fixed Costs.
Q No7.
A manufacturer has made the following estimates: Selling price per unit= Rs .20 Fixed Costs =Rs.15,00,000 Variable cost per unit= Rs.
16 Sales Volume 5,00,000 Calculate Break-even point Break-even Sales Margin of safety Contribution Inflation, meaning of inflation, Types, Causes, Measures to control inflation, Commercial Banks, Functions of Commercial Bank, Central bank, Functions of central Bank; National income, Definitions, Concepts of national Income, Methods of measuring National Income Meaning of Inflation To the neo-classical and their followers at the University of Chicago, inflation is fundamentally a monetary phenomenon.
In the words of Friedman, "Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon…and can be produced only by a more rapid increase in the quantity of money than out¬put.'"
But economists do not agree that money supply alone is the cause of inflation.As pointed out by Hicks, "Our present troubles are not of a monetary character."
Economists, therefore, define inflation in terms of a continuous rise in prices.
Johnson defines "inflation as a sustained rise" in prices.
Brooman defines it as "a continuing increase in the general price level.
"5 Shapiro also defines inflation in a similar vein "as a persistent and appreciable rise in the general level of prices."
Demberg and McDougall are more explicit when they write that "the term usually refers to a continuing rise in prices as measured by an index such as the consumer price index (CPI) or by the implicit price deflator for gross national product."
However, it is essential to understand that a sustained rise in prices may be of various magni-tudes.
Accordingly, different names have been given to inflation depending upon the rate of rise in prices.
Types of Inflation 1.
Creeping Inflation: When the rise in prices is very slow like that of a snail or creeper, it is called creeping inflation.
In terms of speed, a sustained rise in prices of annual increase of less than 3 per cent per annum is characterised as creeping inflation.
Such an increase in prices is regarded safe and essential for economic growth.
2.
Walking or Trotting Inflation: When prices rise moderately and the annual inflation rate is a single digit.
In other words, the rate of rise in prices is in the intermediate range of 3 to 6 per cent per annum or less than 10 per cent.
Inflation at this rate is a warning signal for the government to control it before it turns into running inflation.
3.
Running Inflation: When prices rise rapidly like the running of a horse at a rate or speed of 10 to 20 per cent per annum, it is called running inflation.
Such an inflation affects the poor and middle classes adversely.
Its control requires strong monetary and fiscal measures, otherwise it leads to hyperinflation.
4.
Hyperinflation: When prices rise very fast at double or triple digit rates from more than 20 to 100 per cent per annum or more, it is usually called runaway ox galloping inflation.
It is also characterised as hyperinflation by certain economists.
In reality, hyperinflation is a situation when the rate of inflation be¬comes immeasurable and absolutely uncon¬trollable.
Prices rise many times every day.
Such a situation brings a total collapse of mon¬etary system because of the continuous fall in the purchasing power of money.
The speed with which prices tend to rise is illustrated in Figure 1.
The curve С shows creeping inflation when within a period of ten years the price level has been shown to have risen by about 30 per cent.
The curve W depicts walking inflation when the price level rises by more than 50 per cent during ten years.
The curve R illustrates running inflation showing a rise of about 100 per cent in ten years.
The steep curve H shows the path of hyperinflation when prices rise by more than 120 per cent in less than one year.
5.
Semi-Inflation: According to Keynes, so long as there are unemployed resources, the general price level will not rise as output increases.
But a large increase in aggregate expenditure will face shortages of supplies of some factors which may not be substitutable.
This may lead to increase in costs, and prices start rising.
This is known as semi-inflation or bottleneck inflation because of the bottlenecks in supplies of some factors.
6.
True Inflation: According to Keynes, when the economy reaches the level of full employment, any increase in aggregate expenditure will raise the price level in the same proportion.
This is because it is not possible to increase the supply of factors of production and hence of output after the level of full employment.
This is called true inflation.
The Keynesian semi-inflation and true inflation situ¬ations are illustrated in Figure.2.
Employment and price level are taken on vertical axis and aggregate expenditure on horizontal axis.
FE is the full employment curve.
When with the increase in aggregate expenditure, the price level rises slowly from A to the full employment level B, this is semi-inflation.
But when the aggregate expenditure increases beyond point В the price level rises from В to T in proportion to the increase in aggregate expenditure.
This is true inflation.
7.
Open Inflation: Inflation is open when "markets for goods or factors of production are al¬lowed to function freely, setting prices of goods and factors without normal interference by the authori¬ties.
Thus open inflation is the result of the uninterrupted operation of the market mechanism.
There are no checks or controls on the distribution of commodities by the government.
Increase in demand and shortage of supplies persist which tend to lead to open inflation.
Unchecked open inflation ultimately leads to hyperinflation.
8.
Suppressed Inflation: Men the government imposes physical and monetary controls to check open inflation, it is known as repressed or suppressed inflation.
The market mechanism is not allowed to function normally by the use of licensing, price controls and rationing in order to suppress extensive rise in prices.
So long as such controls exist, the present demand is postponed and there is diversion of demand from controlled to uncontrolled commodities.
But as soon as these controls are removed, there is open inflation.
Moreover, suppressed inflation adversely affects the economy.
When the distribution of commodities is controlled, the prices of uncontrolled commodities rise very high.
Suppressed infla¬tion reduces the incentive to work because people do not get the commodities which they want to have.
Controlled distribution of goods also leads to mal-allocation of resources.
This results in the diversion of productive resources from essential to non-essential industries.
Lastly, suppressed inflation leads to black marketing, corruption, hoarding and profiteering.
9.
Stagflation: Stagflation is a new term which has been added to economic literature in the 1970s.
It is a paradoxical phenomenon where the economy expedience's stagnation as well as inflation.
The word stagflation is the combination of' stag' plus 'flation' taking 'stag' from stagnation and 'flation' from inflation.
Stagflation is a situation when recession is accompanied by a high rate of inflation.
It is, therefore, also called inflationary recession.
The principal cause of this phenomenon has been excessive demand in commodity markets, thereby causing prices to rise, and at the same time the demand for labour is deficient, thereby creating unemployment in the economy.
Three factors have been responsible for the existence of stagflation in the advanced countries since 1972.
First, rise in oil prices and other commodity prices along with adverse changes in the terms of trade, second, the steady and substantial growth of the labour force; and third, rigidities in the wage structure due to strong trade unions.
But wage, cost and price structures are inflexible downward because large business firms and labour organisations possess monopoly power.
Consequently, the fall in demand may not lower prices significantly.
In such a situation, prices will have an upward ratchet effect, and this is known as "ratchet inflation."
Demand-Pull Inflation ________________________________________ Demand-Pull or excess demand inflation is a situation often described as "too much money chas-ing too few goods."
According to this theory, an excess of aggregate demand over aggregate supply will generate inflationary rise in prices.
Its earliest explanation is to be found in the simple quantity theory of money.
The theory states that prices rise in proportion to the increase in the money supply.
Given the full employment level of output, doubling the money supply will double the price level.
So inflation proceeds at the same rate at which the money supply expands.
In this analysis, the aggregate supply is assumed to be fixed and there is always full employment in the economy.
Naturally, when the money supply increases it creates more demand for goods but the supply of goods cannot be increased due to the full employment of resources.
This leads to rise in prices.
Modem quantity theorists led by Friedman hold that "inflation is always and everywhere a mon-etary phenomenon.
The higher the growth rate of the nominal money supply, the higher the rate of inflation.
When the money supply increases, people spend more in relation to the available supply of goods and services.
This bids prices up.
Modem quantity theorists neither assume full employment as a normal situation nor a stable velocity of money.
Still they regard inflation as the result of excessive increase in the money supply.
The quantity theory version of the demand-pull inflation is illustrated in Figure 3.
Suppose the money sup¬ply is increased at a given price level OP as determined by the demand and supply curves D and S1 respec¬tively.
The initial full employment situation OYF at this price level is shown by the interaction of these curves at point E. Now with the increase in the quantity of money, the aggregate demand increase which shifts the demand curve D to D1 to the right.
The aggregate supply being fixed, as shown by the vertical portion of the supply curve SS1 the D1 curve intersects it at point E1.
This raises the price level to OP1.
The Keynesian theory on demand-pull inflation is based on the argument that so long as there are unem¬ployed resources in the economy; an increase in invest¬ment expenditure will lead to increase in employment, income and output.
Once full employment is reached and bottlenecks appear, further increase in ex¬penditure will lead to excess demand because output ceases to rise, thereby leading to inflation.
The Keynesian theory of demand -pull inflation is explained diagrammatically in Figure 3.
Suppose the economy is in equilibrium at E where the SS1and D curves intersect with full employment income level OYF .The price level is OP.
Now the government increases its expenditure.
The increase in govern¬ment expenditure implies an increase in aggregate demand which is shown by the upward shift of the D curve to D1 in the figure.
This tends to raise the price level to OP1, as aggregate supply of output cannot be increased after the full employment level.
Cost-Push Inflation ________________________________________ Cost-push inflation is caused by wage increases enforced by unions and profit increases by em-ployers.
This type of inflation has not been a new phenomenon and was found even during the medieval period.
But it was revived in the 1950s and again in the 1970s as the principal cause of inflation.
It also came to be known as the "New Inflation."
Cost-push inflation is caused by wage-push and profit-push to prices for the following reasons: 1.
Rise in Wages: The basis cause of cost-push inflation is the rise in money wages more rapidly than the productivity of labour.
In advanced countries, trade unions are very powerful.
They press employers to grant wage increases considerably in excess of increases in the productivity of labour, thereby raising the cost of production of commodities.
Employers, in turn, raise prices of their prod¬ucts.
Higher wages enable workers to buy as much as before, in spite of higher prices.
On the other hand, the increase in prices induces unions to demand still higher wages.
In this way, the wage-cost spiral continues, thereby leading to cost-push or wage-push inflation.
Cost-push inflation may be fur¬ther aggravated by upward adjustment of wages to compensate for rise in the cost of living index.
2.
Sectoral Rise in Prices: Again, a few sectors of the economy may be affected by money wage increases and prices of their products may be rising.
In many cases, their production such as steel, raw materials, etc.
are used as inputs for the production of commodities in other sectors.
As a result, the production cost of other sectors will rise and thereby push up the prices of their products.
Thus wage- push inflation in a few sectors of the economy may soon lead to inflationary rise in prices in the entire economy.
3.
Rise in Prices of Imported Raw Materials: An increase in the prices of imported raw materials may lead to cost-push inflation.
Since raw materials are used as inputs by the manufacturers of the finished goods, they enter into the cost of production of the latter.
Thus a continuous rise in the prices of raw materials tends to sets off a cost-price-wage spiral.
4.
Profit-Push Inflation: Oligopolist and monopolist firms raise the prices of their products to offset the rise in labour and production costs so as to earn higher profits.
There being imperfect competition in the case of such firms, they are able to "administer prices" of their products.
"In an economy in which so called administered prices abound there is at least the possi¬bility that these prices may be administered upward faster than cost in an attempt to earn greater profits.
To the extent such a process is wide-spread profit-push inflation will result."
Profit-push inflation is, therefore, also called administered-price theory of inflation or price-push inflation or sellers' inflation or market-power inflation.
Cost-push inflation is illustrated in Figure 4.
Where S1 S is the supply curve and D is the demand curve.
Both intersect at E which is the full employment level OYF, and the price level OP is determined.
Given the demand, as shown by the D curve, the supply curve S1 is shown to shift to S2 as a result of cost-push factors.
Consequently, it intersects the D curve at E1 showing rise in the price level from OP to OP1 and fall in aggregate output from OYF to OY1level.
Any further shift in the supply curve will shift and tend to raise the price level and decrease aggregate output further.
It's Importance: Causes of Inflation ________________________________________ Inflation is caused when the aggregate demand exceeds the aggregate supply of goods and services.
We analyse the factors which lead to increase in demand and the shortage of supply.
Factors Affecting Demand: Both Keynesians and monetarists believe that inflation is caused by increase in the aggregate demand.
They point towards the following factors which raise it.
1.
Increase in Money Supply: Inflation is caused by an increase in the supply of money which leads to increase in aggregate demand.
The higher the growth rate of the nominal money supply, the higher is the rate of inflation.
Modem quantity theorists do not believe that true inflation starts after the full employment level.
This view is realistic because all advanced countries are faced with high levels of unemployment and high rates of inflation.
2.
Increase in Disposable Income: When the disposable income of the people increases, it raises their demand for goods and services.
Disposable income may increase with the rise in national income or reduction in taxes or reduction in the saving of the people.
3.
Increase in Public Expenditure: Government activities have been expanding much with the result that government expenditure has also been increasing at a phenomenal rate, thereby raising aggregate demand for goods and services.
Governments of both developed and developing countries are providing more facilities under public utilities and social services, and also nationalising industries and starting public enterprises with the result that they help in increasing aggregate demand.
4.
Increase in Consumer Spending: The demand for goods and services increases when consumer expenditure increases.
Consumers may spend more due to conspicuous consumption or demonstration effect.
They may also spend more whey they are given credit facilities to buy goods on hire-purchase and instalment basis.
5.
Cheap Monetary Policy: Cheap monetary policy or the policy of credit expansion also leads to increase in the money supply which raises the demand for goods and services in the economy.
When credit expands, it raises the money income of the borrowers which, in turn, raises aggregate demand relative to supply, thereby leading to inflation.
This is also known as credit-induced inflation.
6.
Deficit Financing: In order to meet its mounting expenses, the government resorts to deficit financing by borrowing from the public and even by printing more notes.
This raises aggregate demand in relation to aggregate supply, thereby leading to inflationary rise in prices.
This is also known as deficit-induced inflation.
7.
Expansion of the Private Sector: The expansion of the private sector also tends to raise the aggregate demand.
For huge investments increase employment and income, thereby creating more demand for goods and services.
But it takes time for the output to enter the market.
8.
Black Money: The existence of black money in all countries due to corruption, tax evasion etc.
increases the aggregate demand.
People spend such unearned money extravagantly, thereby creat¬ing unnecessary demand for commodities.
This tends to raise the price level further.
9.
Repayment of Public Debt: Whenever the government repays its past internal debt to the public, it leads to increase in the money supply with the public.
This tends to raise the aggregate demand for goods and services.
10.
Increase in Exports: When the demand for domestically produced goods increases in for¬eign countries, this raises the earnings of industries producing export commodities.
These, in turn, create more demand for goods and services within the economy.
Factors Affecting Supply: There are also certain factors which operate on the opposite side and tend to reduce the aggre¬gate supply.
Some of the factors are as follows: 1.
Shortage of Factors of Production: One of the important causes affecting the supplies of goods is the shortage of such factors as labour, raw materials, power supply, capital, etc.
They lead to excess capacity and reduction in industrial production.
2.
Industrial Disputes: In countries where trade unions are powerful, they also help in curtail¬ing production.
Trade unions resort to strikes and if they happen to be unreasonable from the employ¬ers' viewpoint' and are prolonged, they force the employers to declare lock-outs.
In both cases, industrial production falls, thereby reducing supplies of goods.
If the unions succeed in raising money wages of their members to a very high level than the productivity of labour, this also tends to reduce production and supplies of goods.
3.
Natural Calamities: Drought or floods is a factor which adversely affects the supplies of agricultural products.
The latter, in turn, create shortages of food products and raw materials, thereby helping inflationary pressures.
4.
Artificial Scarcities: Artificial scarcities are created by hoarders and speculators who indulge in black marketing.
Thus they are instrumental in reducing supplies of goods and raising their prices.
5.
Increase in Exports: When the country produces more goods for export than for domestic consumption, this creates shortages of goods in the domestic market.
This leads to inflation in the economy.
6.
Lop-sided Production: If the stress is on the production of comforts, luxuries, or basic products to the neglect of essential consumer goods in the country, this creates shortages of consumer goods.
This again causes inflation.
7.
Law of Diminishing Returns: If industries in the country are using old machines and out¬moded methods of production, the law of diminishing returns operates.
This raises cost per unit of production, thereby raising the prices of products.
8. International Factors: In modern times, inflation is a worldwide phenomenon.
When prices rise in major industrial countries, their effects spread to almost all countries with which they have trade relations.
Often the rise in the price of a basic raw material like petrol in the international market leads to rise in the price of all related commodities in a country.
Measures to Control Inflation ________________________________________ We have studied above that inflation is caused by the failure of aggregate supply to equal the increase in aggregate demand.
Inflation can, therefore, be controlled by increasing the supplies and reducing money incomes in order to control aggregate demand.
The various methods are usually grouped under three heads: Monetary measures, fiscal measures and other measures.
1.
Monetary Measures: Monetary measures aim at reducing money incomes.
(a) Credit Control: One of the important monetary measures is monetary policy.
The central bank of the country adopts a number of methods to control the quantity and quality of credit.
For this purpose, it raises the bank rates, sells securities in the open market, raises the reserved ratio, and adopts a number of selective credit control measures, such as raising margin requirements and regulating consumer credit.
Monetary policy may not be effective in controlling inflation, if inflation is due to cost-push factors.
Monetary policy can only be helpful in controlling inflation due to demand-pull factors.
(b) Demonetization of Currency: However, one of the monetary measures is to demonetize currency of higher denominations.
Such a measure is usually adopted when there is abundance of black money in the country.
(c) Issue of New Currency: The most extreme monetary measure is the issue of new currency in place of the old currency.
Under this system, one new note is exchanged for a number of notes of the old currency.
The value of bank deposits is also fixed accordingly.
Such a measure is adopted when there is an excessive issue of notes and there is hyperinflation in the country.
It is a very effective measure.
But is inequitable for it hurts the small depositors the most.
2.
Fiscal Measures: Monetary policy alone is incapable of controlling inflation.
It should, therefore, be supplemented by fiscal measures.
Fiscal measures are highly effective for controlling government expenditure, personal consumption expenditure, and private and public investment.
The principal fiscal measures are the following: (a) Reduction in Unnecessary Expenditure: The government should reduce unnecessary ex¬penditure on non-development activities in order to curb inflation.
This will also put a check on private expenditure which is dependent upon government demand for goods and services.
But it is not easy to cut government expenditure.
Though economy measures are always welcome but it becomes difficult to distinguish between essential and non-essential expenditure.
Therefore, this measure should be supple¬mented by taxation.
(b) Increase in Taxes: To cut personal consumption expenditure, the rates of personal, corpo¬rate and commodity taxes should be raised and even new taxes should be levied, but the rates of taxes should not be so high as to discourage saving, investment and production.
Rather, the tax system should provide larger incentives to those who save, invest and produce more.
Further, to bring more revenue into the tax-net, the government should penalise the tax evaders by imposing heavy fines.
Such mea¬sures are bound to be effective in controlling inflation.
To increase the supply of goods within the country, the government should reduce import duties and increase export duties.
(c) Increase in Savings: Another measure is to increase savings on the part of the people.
This will tend to reduce disposable income with the people, and hence personal consumption expenditure.
But due to the rising cost of living, people are not in a position to save much voluntarily.
Keynes, therefore, advocated compulsory savings or what he called 'deferred payment' where the saver gets his money back after some years.
For this purpose, the government should float public loans carrying high rates of interest, start saving schemes with prize money, or lottery for long periods, etc.
It should also introduce compulsory provident fund, provident fund-cum-pension schemes, etc.
compulsorily.
All such measures to increase savings are likely to be effective in controlling inflation.
(d) Surplus Budgets: An important measure is to adopt anti-inflationary budgetary policy.
For this purpose, the government should give up deficit financing and instead have surplus budgets.
It means collecting more in revenues and spending less.
(e) Public Debt: At the same time, it should stop repayment of public debt and postpone it to some future date till inflationary pressures are controlled within the economy.
Instead, the government should borrow more to reduce money supply with the public.
Like the monetary measures, fiscal measures alone cannot help in controlling inflation.
They should be supplemented by monetary, non-monetary and non- fiscal measures.
3.
Other Measures: The other types of measures are those which aim at increasing aggregate supply and reducing aggregate demand directly: (a) To Increase Production: The following measures should be adopted to increase production: (i) One of the foremost measures to control inflation is to increase the production of essential consumer goods like food, clothing, kerosene oil, sugar, vegetable oils, etc.
(ii) If there is need, raw materials for such products may be imported on preferential basis to increase the production of essential commodities.
(iii) Efforts should also be made to increase productivity.
For this purpose, industrial peace should be maintained through agreements with trade unions, binding them not to resort to strikes for some time.
(iv) The policy of rationalisation of industries should be adopted as a long-term measure.
Rationalisation increases productivity and production of industries through the use of brain, brawn and bullion.
(v) All possible help in the form of latest technology, raw materials, financial help, subsidies, etc.
should be provided to different consumer goods sectors to increase production.
(b) Rational Wage Policy: Another important measure is to adopt a rational wage and income policy.
Under hyperinflation, there is a wage-price spiral.
To control this, the government should freeze wages, incomes, profits, dividends, bonus, etc.
But such a drastic measure can only be adopted for a short period and by antagonising both workers and industrialists.
Therefore, the best course is to link increase in wages to increase in productivity.
This will have a dual effect.
It will control wages and at the same time increase productivity, and hence increase production of goods in the economy.
(c) Price Control: Price control and rationing is another measure of direct control to check inflation.
Price control means fixing an upper limit for the prices of essential consumer goods.
They are the maximum prices fixed by law and anybody charging more than these prices is punished by law.
But it is difficult to administer price control.
(d) Rationing: Rationing aims at distributing consumption of scarce goods so as to make them available to a large number of consumers.
It is applied to essential consumer goods such as wheat, rice, sugar, kerosene oil, etc.
It is meant to stabilise the prices of necessaries and assure distributive justice.
But it is very inconvenient for consumers because it leads to queues, artificial shortages, corruption and black marketing.
Keynes did not favour rationing for it "involves a great deal of waste, both of resources and of employment."
Conclusion: From the various monetary, fiscal and other measures discussed above, it becomes clear that to control inflation, the government should adopt all measures simultaneously.
Inflation is like a hydra-¬headed monster which should be fought by using all the weapons at the command of the government.
Effects of Inflation ________________________________________ Inflation affects different people differently.
This is because of the fall in the value of money.
When prices rise or the value of money falls, some groups of the society gain, some lose and some stand in between.
Broadly speaking, there are two economic groups in every society, the fixed income group and the flexible income group.
People belonging to the first group lose and those belonging to the second group gain.
The reason is that price movements in the case of different goods, services, assets, etc.
are not uniform.
When there is inflation, most prices are rising, but the rates of increase of individual prices differ much.
Prices of some goods and services rise faster, of others slowly, and of still others remain unchanged.
We discuss below the effects of inflation on redistribution of income and wealth, production, and on the society as a whole.
1.
Effects on Redistribution of Income and Wealth: There are two ways to measure the effects of inflation on the redistribution of income and wealth in a society.
First, on the basis of the change in the real value of such factor incomes as wages, salaries, rents, interest, dividends and profits.
Second, on the basis of the size distribution of income over time as a result of inflation, i.e.
whether the incomes of the rich have increased and that of the middle and poor classes have declined with inflation.
Inflation brings about shifts in the distribution of real income from those whose money incomes are relatively inflexible to those whose money incomes are relatively flexible.
The poor and middle classes suffer because their wages and salaries are more or less fixed but the prices of commodities continue to rise.
They become more impoverished.
On the other hand, businessmen, industrialists, traders, reals estate holders, speculators, and others with variable incomes gain during rising prices.
The latter category of persons becomes rich at the cost of the former group.
There is unjustified transfer of income and wealth from the poor to the rich.
As a result, the rich roll in wealth and indulge in conspicuous consumption, while the poor and middle classes live in abject misery and poverty.
But which income group of society gains or losses from inflation depends on who anticipates inflation and who does not.
Those who correctly anticipate inflation, they can adjust their present earnings, buying, borrowing, and lending activities against the loss of income and wealth due to infla¬tion.
They, therefore, do not get hurt by the inflation.
Failure to anticipate inflation correctly leads to redistribution of income and wealth.
In practice, all persons are unable to anticipate and predict the rate of inflation correctly so that they cannot adjust their economic behaviour accordingly.
As a result, some persons gain while others lose.
The net result is redistribution of income and wealth.
The effects of inflation on different groups of society are discussed below: (1) Debtors and Creditors: During periods of rising prices, debtors gain and creditors lose.
When prices rise, the value of money falls.
Though debtors return the same amount of money, but they pay less in terms of goods and services.
This is because the value of money is less than when they borrowed the money.
Thus the burden of the debt is reduced and debtors gain.
On the other hand, creditors lose.
Although they get back the same amount of money which they lent, they receive less in real terms because the value of money falls.
Thus inflation brings about a redistribution of real wealth in favour of debtors at the cost of creditors.
(2) Salaried Persons: Salaried workers such as clerks, teachers, and other white collar persons lose when there is inflation.
The reason is that their salaries are slow to adjust when prices are rising.
(3) Wage Earners: Wage earners may gain or lose depending upon the speed with which their wages adjust to rising prices.
If their unions are strong, they may get their wages linked to the cost of living index.
In this way, they may be able to protect themselves from the bad effects of inflation.
But the problem is that there is often a time lag between the raising of wages by employees and the rise in prices.
So workers lose because by the time wages are raised, the cost of living index may have increased further.
But where the unions have entered into contractual wages for a fixed period, the workers lose when prices continue to rise during the period of contract.
On the whole, the wage earners are in the same position as the white collar persons.
(4) Fixed Income Group: The recipients of transfer payments such as pensions, unemployment insurance, social security, etc.
and recipients of interest and rent live on fixed incomes.
Pensioners get fixed pensions.
Similarly the rentier class consisting of interest and rent receivers get fixed payments.
The same is the case with the holders of fixed interest bearing securities, debentures and deposits.
All such persons lose because they receive fixed payments, while the value of money continues to fall with rising prices.
Among these groups, the recipients of transfer payments belong to the lower income group and the rentier class to the upper income group.
Inflation redistributes income from these two groups towards the middle income group comprising traders and businessmen.
(5) Equity Holders or Investors: Persons who hold shares or stocks of companies gain during inflation.
For when prices are rising, business activities expand which increase profits of companies.
As profits increase, dividends on equities also increase at a faster rate than prices.
But those who invest in debentures, securities, bonds, etc.
which carry a fixed interest rate lose during inflation because they receive a fixed sum while the purchasing power is falling.
(6) Businessmen: Businessmen of all types, such as producers, traders and real estate holders gain during periods of rising prices.
Take producers first.
When prices are rising, the value of their inventories rise in the same proportion.
So they profit more when they sell their stored commodities.
The same is the case with traders in the short ran.
But producers profit more in another way.
Their costs do not rise to the extent of the rise in the prices of their goods.
This is because prices of raw materials and other inputs and wages do not rise immediately to the level of the price rise.
The holders of real estate's also profit during inflation because the prices of landed property increase much faster than the general price level.
(7) Agriculturists: Agriculturists are of three types: landlords, peasant proprietors, and landless agricultural workers.
Landlords lose during rising prices because they get fixed rents.
But peasant proprietors who own and cultivate their farms gain.
Prices of farm products increase more than the cost of production.
For prices of inputs and land revenue do not rise to the same extent as the rise in the prices of farm products.
On the other hand, the landless agricultural workers are hit hard by rising prices.
Their wages are not raised by the farm owners because trade unionism is absent among them.
But the prices of consumer goods rise rapidly.
So landless agricultural workers are losers.
(8) Government: The government as a debtor gains at the expense of households who are its principal creditors.
This is because interest rates on government bonds are fixed and are not raised to offset expected rise in prices.
The government, in turn, levies less taxes to service and retire its debt.
With inflation, even the real value of taxes in reduced.
Thus redistribution of wealth in favour of the government accrues as a benefit to the tax-payers.
Since the tax-payers of the government are high- income groups, they are also the creditors of the government because it is they who hold government bonds.
As creditors, the real value of their assets declines and as tax-payers, the real value of their liabilities also declines during inflation.
The extent to which they will be gainers or losers on the whole is a very complicated calculation.
Conclusion: Thus inflation redistributes income from wage earners and fixed income groups to profit recipients, and from creditors to debtors.
In so far as wealth redistributions are concerned, the very poor and the very rich are more likely to lose than middle income groups.
This is because the poor hold what little wealth they have in monetary form and has few debts, whereas the very rich hold a substantial part of their wealth in bonds and have relatively few debts.
On the other hand, the middle income groups are likely to be heavily in debt and hold some wealth in common stock as well as in real assets.
2.
Effects on Production: When prices start rising, production is encouraged.
Producers earn wind-fall profits in the future.
They invest more in anticipation of higher profits in the future.
This tends to increase employment, production and income.
But this is only possible up to the full employment level.
Further increase in investment beyond this level will lead to severe inflationary pressures within the economy because prices rise more than production as the resources are fully employed.
So inflation adversely affects production after the level of full employment.
The adverse effects of inflation on production are discussed below: (1) Misallocation of Resources: Inflation causes misallocation of resources when producers divert resources from the production of essential to non-essential goods from which they expect higher profits.
(2) Changes in the System of Transactions: Inflation leads to changes in transactions pattern of producers.
They hold a smaller stock of real money holdings against unexpected contingencies than before.
They devote more time and attention to converting money into inventories or other financial or real assets.
It means that time and energy are diverted from the production of goods and services and some resources are used wastefully.
(3) Reduction in Production: Inflation adversely affects the volume of production because the expectation of rising prices along with rising costs of inputs brings uncertainty.
This reduces production.
(4) Fall in Quality: Continuous rise in prices creates a seller's market.
In such a situation, producers produce and sell sub-standard commodities in order to earn higher profits.
They also indulge in adulteration of commodities.
(5) Hoarding and Black-marketing: To profit more from rising prices, producers hoard stocks of their commodities.
Consequently, an artificial scarcity of commodities is created in the market.
Then the producers sell their products in the black market which increase inflationary pressures.
(6) Reduction in Saving: When prices rise rapidly, the propensity to save declines because more money is needed to buy goods and services than before.
Reduced saving adversely affects investment and capital formation.
As a result, production is hindered.
(7) Hinders Foreign Capital: Inflation hinders the inflow of foreign capital because the rising costs of materials and other inputs make foreign investment less profitable.
(8) Encourages Speculation: Rapidly rising prices create uncertainty among producers who indulge in speculative activities in order to make quick profits.
Instead of engaging themselves in productive activities, they speculate in various types of raw materials required in production.
3.
Other Effects: Inflation leads to a number of other effects which are discussed as under: (1) Government: Inflation affects the government in various ways.
It helps the government in financing its activities through inflationary finance.
As the money income of the people increases, the government collects that in the form of taxes on incomes and commodities.
So the revenues of the government increase during rising prices.
Moreover, the real burden of the public debt decreases when prices are rising.
But the government expenses also increase with rising production costs of public projects and enterprises and increase in administrative expenses as prices and wages rise.
On the whole, the government gains under inflation because rising wages and profits spread an illusion of prosperity within the country.
(2) Balance of Payments: Inflation involves the sacrificing of the advantages of international specialisation and division of labour.
It adversely affects the balance of payments of a country.
When prices rise more rapidly in the home country than in foreign countries, domestic products become costlier compared to foreign products.
This tends to increase imports and reduce exports, thereby making the balance of payments unfavourable for the country.
This happens only when the country follows a fixed exchange rate policy.
But there is no adverse impact on the balance of payments if the country is on the flexible exchange rate system.
(3) Exchange Rate: When prices rise more rapidly in the home country than in foreign coun¬tries, it lowers the exchange rate in relation to foreign currencies.
(4) Collapse of the Monetary System: If hyperinflation persists and the value of money continues to fall many times in a day, it ultimately leads to the collapse of the monetary system, as happened in Germany after World War I.
(5) Social.
Inflation is socially harmful: By widening the gulf between the rich and the poor, rising prices create discontentment among the masses.
Pressed by the rising cost of living, workers resort to strikes which lead to loss in production.
Lured by profit, people resort to hoarding, black-marketing, adulteration, manufacture of substandard commodities, speculation, etc.
Corruption spreads in every walk of life.
All this reduces the efficiency of the economy.
Commercial Bank Today commercial bank plays an important role in country's economic development.
It mobilizes saving and help in allocation of resources.
The shape in which we see commercial bank today it is not a one-day affair.
The origin of commercial banking can be traceable in the early times of human history.
In the ancient Rome and Greece, the practice of storing precious metals and coins at sage places and loaning out money for public and private purposes on interest was prevalent.
In England, banking had its origin with the London goldsmiths who in the 17th century began to accept deposits from merchants and others for safe-keeping of money and other valuables.
As public enterprise, banking made its first appearance in Italy in 1157 when the Bank of Venice was founded.
Meaning of Bank A bank is an institution which deals with money and credit The commercial bank accept deposit from the people and advance loan to the people at the time of need.
It also help in mobilization of sources.
As in modern times commercial bank play different roles it is very difficult to give a precise definitions..
It is because of this reason that different economists give different definitions of the bank.
According to Crowther a bank "collects money from those who have it to spare of\r who are saving it out of their incomes, and it lends this money to those who require it, " In the words of Kinley, " A bank is an establishment which makes to individuals such advances of money as may be required and safely made, and to which individuals entrust money when not required by them for use."
According to john paget, "No body can be banker who does not (i) take deposit accounts, (ii) take current accounts, (iii) issue and pay cheques, and (iv) collects cheques-crossed and uncrossed-for its customers."
Prof. Sayers defines the terms bank and banking distinctly.
He defines a bank as "an institution whose debts (bank deposits) are widely accepted in settlement of other people's debts to each other."
Again according to Sayers," Ordinary banking business consists cash for bank deposits and bank deposits for cash ; transferring bank deposits from one person of corporation to another ; gibing bank deposits in exchange for bills of exchange, government bonds, the secured promises of businessmen to repay and so forth".
According to the Indian Companies Act, 1949, banking means "the accepting for the purpose of Indian Companies lending of investment, of deposits of money from the public, repayable on demand or demand or otherwise, and withdraw able by cheque, draft of otherwise."
Different economist defines bank differently.
So a single definition may not be sufficient to say what a bank is.
If we take all the definitions we derive the following features of the commercial banks.
(i) It deals with money ; it accepts deposits and advances loans.
(ii) It also deals with credit ; it has the ability to create.
I.e., the ability to expand its liabilities as a multiple of its reserves.
(iii) It is commercial institution ; it aims at earning profit.
(iv) It is a unique financial institution that creates demand deposits which serve as a medium of exchange and, as a result, the banks manage the payment system of the country.
Functions of Commercial Bank.
Today commercial banks performs different function which help the economy in different way.
It is not possible to discuss all the functions.
But there are some basic function which is common to most of the commercial banks are discussed here... 1.Accepting Deposits The first important function of a bank is to accept deposits from those who can save but cannot profitably utilize this saving themselves.
People consider it more rational to deposit their savings in a bank decease by doing so they, on the one band, earn interest, and on the other, avoid the danger of theft.
To attract savings from all sorts of individuals, the banks maintain different types of accounts; (i) Fixed Deposit Account.
Money in these accounts is deposited for fixed period of time (say one, two, or five years) and cannot be withdrawn before the expiry of that period.
The rate of interest on this account is higher than that on other types of deposits.
The longer the period, the higher will be the rate of interest.
Fixed deposits are also called time deposits of time liabilities.
(ii) Current deposit Account.
These accounts are generally maintained by the traders and businessmen who have to make a number of payments every day.
Money from these accounts can be withdrawn in as many times and in as much amount as desired by the depositors.
Normally, no interest is paid on these accounts.
Rather, the depositors have to pay certain incidental charges to the bank for the services rendered by it.
Current deposits are also called demand deposits or demand liabilities.
(iii) Saving Deposit Account.
The aim of these accounts is to encourage and mobilize small savings of the public.
Certain restrictions are imposed on the depositors regarding the number of withdrawals and the amount to be with drawn in a given period.
Cheque facility is provided to the depositors.
Rate of interest paid on these deposits is low as compared to that on fixed deposits.
(iv) Recurring Deposit Account.
The purpose of these accounts is to encourage regular saving by the public, particularly by the fixed income group.
Generally money in these accounts is deposited in monthly installments for a fixed period and is repaid to the depositors along with interest on maturity.
The rate of interest on these deposits is nearly the same as on fixed deposits.
(v) Home safe Accounts.
Home safe account is another scheme aiming at promoting saving habits among the people.
Under this scheme a safe is supplied to the depositor to keep it at home and to put his small savings in it.
Periodically, the safe is taken to the bank where the amount of safe is credited to his account.
2.
Advancing of loans.
The second important function of a bank is advancing of loans to the public.
After keeping certain cash reserves, the banks lend their deposits to the needy borrowers.
Before advancing loans, the banks satisfy themselves about the credit worthiness of the borrowers.
Various types of loans granted by the banks are discussed below.
(i) Money at Call.
Such loans are very short period loans and can be called back by the bank at a very short notice of say one day to fourteen days.
These loans are generally made to other banks or financial institutions.
(ii) Cash Credit.
It is a type of loan which is given to the borrower against his current assets, such as shares, stocks.
Bonds.
Etc.
Such loans are not based on personal security.
The bank opens the account in the name of the borrowers and allows him to withdraw borrowed money from time to time upto a certain limit as determined by the value of his current asserts.
Interest is charged only on the amount actually withdrawn from the account.
(iii) Overdraft.
Sometimes, the bank provides overdraft facilities to its customers though which they are allowed to withdraw more than their deposits.
Interest is charged from the customers on the overdrawn amount.
(iv) Discounting of Bills of Exchange.
This is another popular type of lending by the modern banks.
Through this method, a holder of a bill of exchange can get it discounted by the bank.
Ina bill of exchange the debtor accepts the bill drawn upon him by the creditor (i.e., holder of the bill) and agrees to pay the amount mentioned on maturity.
After making some marginal deductions (in the from of commission), the bank pays the value of the bill to the holder.
When the bill of exchange matures, the bank gets its payment from the party which had accepted the bill.
Thus, such a loan is self- liquidating.
(v) Term Loans.
The banks have also started advancing medium-term and long-term loans.
The maturity period for such loans is more than one year.
The amount sanctioned is either paid of credited to the account of the borrower.
The interest is charged on the entire amount of the loans and the loan is repaid either on maturity or in installments.
3. Credit Creation.
A unique function of the bank is to create credit.
In fact, credit creations is the natural outcome of the process of advancing loan as adopted by the banks.
When a bank advances a loan to its customer, it does not lend cash but opens an account in the borrower's name and credits the amount of loan to this account.
Thus, whenever bank grants a loan, it creates an equal amount of bank deposit.
Creation of such deposits is called credit creation which results in a net increase in the money stock of the economy.
Banks have the ability to create credit many times more than their deposits and this ability of multiple credit creation depends upon the cash-reserve ratio of the banks.
4.
Promoting cheque System.
Banks also render a very useful medium of exchange in the form of cheques.
Through a cheque, the depositor directs the bankers to make payment to the payee.
Cheque is the most developed credit instrument in the money market.
In the modern business transactions, cheques have become much more convenient method of settling debts than the use of cash.
5.
Agency functions.
Banks also perform certain agency functions for and on behalf of their customers: (i) Remittance of funds.
Banks help their customers in transferring funds from one place to another through cheques, drafts, etc.
(ii) Collection and payment of credit Instruments.
Banks collect and pay various credit instruments like cheques, bills of exchange, promissory notes, etc.
(iii) Execution of Standing Orders.
Banks execute the standing instructions of their customers for making various periodic payments.
The pay subscriptions, rents, insurance premium, etc.
on behalf of their customers.
(iv) Purchasing and Sale of Securities.
Banks undertake purchase and sale of various securities like shares, stocks, bonds, debentures etc.
on behalf of their customers.
Banks neither give any advice to their customers regarding these investments nor levy any charge on them for their service, but simply perform the function of a broker.
(v) Collection of Dividends on Shares.
Banks collect dividends, interest on shares and debentures of their customers.
(vi) Income Tax Consultancy.
Banks may also employ income- tax experts to prepare income-tax returns for their customers and to help them to get refund of income tax.
(vii) Acting as Trustee and Executor.
Banks preserve the wills of their customers and execute them after their death.
(viii) Acting as Representative and Correspondent.
Sometimes the banks act as representatives and correspondents of their customers.
They get passports, traveler's tickets, book vehicles, plots for their customers and receive letters on their behalf.
1.
General Utility function.
In addition to agency services, the modern banks provide many general utility services as given below: (i) Locker Facility.
Banks provide locker facility to their customers.
The customers can keep their valuables and important documents in these lockers for safe custody.
(ii) Traveler's Cheques.
Banks issue traveler's cheques to help their customers to travel without the fear of theft of loss of money.
With this facility, the customers need not take the risk of carrying cash with them during their travels.
(iii) Letter of Credit.
Letters of credit are issued by the banks to their customers certifying their creditworthiness.
Letters of credit are very useful in foreign trade.
(iv) Collection of statistics.
Banks collect statistics giving important information relating to industry, trade and commerce, money and banking.
They also publish journals and bulletins containing research articles on economic and financial matters.
(v) Underwriting Securities.
Banks underwrite the securities issued by the government, public of private bodies.
Because of its full faith in banks, the public will not hesitate in buying securities carrying the signatures of a bank.
(vi) Gift Cheques.
Some banks issue cheques of various denominations (say of Rs.11,21,31,51,101,etc.)
to be used on auspicious occasions.
(vii) Acting as Referee.
Banks may be referred for seeking information regarding the financial position, business reputation and respectability of their customers.
(viii) Foreign Exchange Business.
Banks also deal in the business of foreign currencies.
Again, they may finance foreign trade by discounting foreign bills of exchange.
ROLE OF COMMERCIAL BANKS IN A DEVELOPING ECONOMY A will-developed banking system is a necessary pre-condition for economic development in a modern economy.
Besides providing financial resources for the growth of industrialization, banks can also influence the direction in which these resources are to be utilized.
In the underdeveloped and developing countries, not only the banking facilities are limited to a few developed urban areas, but also the banking activities are limited mostly to trade and commerce, paying little attention to industry and agriculture.
Structural as will as functional reforms in the banking system are needed to enable the banks perform developmental role in underdeveloped countries.
Banks and economic Development In a modern economy, banks are to be considered not merely as dealers in money but also the leaders in development.
They are not only the store house of the country's wealth but also are the reservoirs of resources necessary for economic development.
Banks play an important role in the development of a country.
It is the growth of commercial banking in the 18th and 19th centuries that facilitated the occurrence of industrial revolution in Europe.
Similarly, the economic progress in the present day developing economics largely depends upon the growth of sound banking systems in these economies.
Commercial banks can contribute to a country's economics development in the following way.
1.
Capital formation.
Capital formations is the most important determinant of economic development and banks promote capital formation.
Capital formation has three well-defined stages: (a) generation of saving, (b) mobilization of saving, and (c) canalization of saving in productive uses.
Banks play a crucial role in all the three stages of capital formation: (a) they stimulate savings by providing a number of incentives to the savers, such as, interest on deposits, free and cheap remittance of funds, safe custody of valuables, etc.
(b) By expanding their branches in deferent areas and giving various incentives, they succeed in mobilizing the savings generated in the economy.
They not only mobilize resources from those who have the opportunities of productive investment.
2.
Encouragement to Entrepreneurial Innovations.
In underdeveloped countries, entrepreneurs generally hesitate to invest in new ventures and undertake innovations largely sue to lack of funds.
Facilities of bank loans enable the entrepreneurs to step up their investment and innovational activities, adopt new methods of production and increase productive capacity of the economy.
3.
Monetization of Economy.
Monetization of the economy is essential for accelerating trade and economic activity.
Banks, which are creators and distributors of money to play an active role in the economy.
They help the process of monetization in two ways: (a) They monetize debts.
In other words, they buy debts (i.e., securities which are not acceptable as money).
(b) By spreading their branches in the rural and backward areas, the banks convert the non-monetized sectors of the economy into monetized sectors.
4.
Influencing Economic Activity.
Banks can directly influence economic activity, and hence, the pace of economic development through its influence on (a) the rate of interest, and (b) the availability of credit.
(i) Variations in Interest Rates.
A reduction in the interest rates makes the investment more profitable and stimulates economic activity.
An increase in the interest rate, on the other hand, discourages investment and economic activity.
Thus, to overcome a deflationary situation, banks can follow cheap money policy with low interest rates and to control inflation they can adopt dear money policy with high interest rates.
(ii) Availability of Credit Bankers can also influence economic activity by the availability of credit.
Credit creation is as important function of banks and bank credit forms the major portion of money supply.
Thus, through their credit creation activity the banks increase the supply of purchasing power and hence the aggregate demand.
This, in turn increase investment, production and trade in the economy.
5.
Implementation of Monetary Policy.
Economic development needs an appropriate monetary policy.
But, a well-developed banking system is a necessary pre-condition for the effective implementation of the monetary policy.
Control and regulation of credit by the monetary authority is not possible without the active co-operation of the baking system in the country.
6.
Promotion of Trade and Industry.
Economic progress in the industrially advanced countries in the last two hounded years of so is mainly due to expansion in trade and industrialization which could not have been made possible without the development of baking system.
The use of bank cheque, the bank draft and the bill of exchange has revolutionized the internal and international trade, which, in turn, has encouraged specialization and accelerated the pace of industrialization.
7.
Encouragement to Right 'Type of Industries.
By granting loans (particularly medium-term and long tem), the banks can provide financial resources to the right type of industries to secure necessary material, machines and other inputs.
In a planned economy, it is necessary that the banks should formulate their loan policies in accordance with the broad objectives and strategy of industrialization as adopted in the plan.
This will promote right type of industrialization in the economy.
8.
Regional Development.
Banks can also play an important role in achieving balanced development in different regions of the economy.
They can transfer surplus capital from the developed regions to the less- developed regions where it is scarce and most needed.
This reallocation of funds between regions will promote economic development in underdeveloped areas of the economy.
9.
Development of Agriculture and Other Neglected Sectors.
Underdeveloped economies are primarily agricultural economies and majority of the population in these economies live in rural areas.
Therefore, economic development in these economies requires the development of agriculture and small-scale industries.
Central Bank (Reserve Bank of India) Central bank of any economy plays the role of a guardian to the government.
The Reserve Bank of India is India's central bank.
It is the apex monetary institution which supervises, regulates, controls and develops the monetary and financial of the country.
The Reserve bank established on April 1, 1935 under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 Initially, it was constituted as a private share-holders' bank But it was nationalized on January 1, 1949..The Reserve bank of India since its inception have been playing greater role in setting monetary policy to accelerate economic development in India.
It play an important role at the time of economic fluctuations and trade cycles The Preamble of the Reserve Bank of India describes the basic functions of the Reserve Bank as to regulate the issue of Bank Notes and keeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary stability in India and generally to operate the currency and credit system of the country to its advantage.
Difference between central Bank and Commercial Bank  The central bank is the apex monetary intuition where as commercial banks are the constituent unit.
 The central bank does not operate with profit motive.
 Commercial banks have profit motive.
 State owned/privately owned  No public contact/public contact  No competition with commercial bank Management The management of the Reserve Bank is under the control of Central Board of Directors consisting of 20 members: (a) The executive head of the Bank is called Governor who is assisted by four Deputy governors.
They are appointed by the Government of India for a period of five years, The head office of the Reserve Bank is at Bombay.
(b) There are four local boards at Delhi, Calcutta, Madras and Bombay representing four regional areas, i.e., northern, eastern, southern and western respectively.
These local boards are advisory in nature and the government of India nominates one member each from these boards to the Central Board.
(c) There are ten directors from various fields and one government official from the Ministry of Finance.
The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 requires that there must be at least six meetings in a year and the gap between two meetings must not exceed three months.
The governor of the Reserve Bank can call a meeting of the Central Board whenever the feels it necessary.
The Governor and the Deputy governors are full-time official of the Reserve Bank and are paid prescribed salaries and allowances.
Other directors are part-time officials and are given fare and allowance to participate in the meetings.
2.
FUNCTIONS OF RESERVE BANK The Reserve Bank of India not only performs various traditional central banking functions but also undertakes different promotional and developmental measures to meet the dynamic requirements of the country.
The broad objectives of the reserve Bank are ; (a) regulating the issue of currency in India : (b) keeping the foreign exchange reserves of the country c) establishing the monetary stability in the country :and (d) developing the financial structure of the country on sound lines consistent with the national socio-economic objectives and policies.
Main functions of the reserve Bank are described below : 1.
Note Issue.
The Reserve Bank has the monopoly of note issue in the country.
It has the sole right to issue currency notes of all denominations except one rupee notes.
One rupee notes are issued by the Ministry of Finance of the Government of India.
The Reserve Bank acts as the only source of legal tender because even the one rupee notes are circulated through it.
The Reserve Bank has a separate issue Department which is entrusted with the job of issuing currency notes.
The Reserve Bank has adopted minimum reserve system of note issue.
Since 1957, it maintains gold and foreign exchange reserves of Rs.200 crore, of which at least Rs.115 crore should be in gold.
2.
Banker to government.
The Reserve Bank acts as the banker, agent and adviser to Government India: (a) It maintains and operates government deposits.
(b) It collects and makes payments on behalf of the government.
(c) It helps the government to float new loans and manages the public debt.
(d) It sells for the Central Government treasury bills of 91days duration.
(e) It makes 'ways and Means' advances to the Central and State Governments for periods not exceeding three months.
(f) It provides development finance to the government for carrying out five year plans.
(g) It undertakes foreign exchange transactions on behalf of the Central government.
(h) It acts as the agent of the government of India in the latter's dealings with the international Monetary fund (IMF), the world Bank, and other international financial institutions.
(i) It advises the government on all financial matters such as loan operations, investments, agricultural and industrial finance, banking, planning, economic development, etc.
3.
Banker's Bank.
The Reserve Bank acts as the banker's bank in the following respects : (a) every Bank is under the statutory obligation to keep a certain minimum of cash reserves with the Reserve Bank.
The purpose of these reserves is to enable the Reserve bank to extend financial assistance to the scheduled banks in times of emergency and thus to act as the last resort.
According to the banking Regulation Act, 1949, all scheduled banks are required to maintain with the Reserve bank minimum cash reserves of 5% of their demand liabilities and 2% of their time liabilities.
The reserve Bank (Amendment) Act, 1956 empowered the Reserve Bank to raise the cash reserve ratio to 20% in the case of demand deposits and to 8% in case of time deposits.
Due to the difficulty of classifying deposits into demand and time categories, the amendment to the Banking Regulation Act in September 1972 changed the provision of reserves to 3% of aggregate deposit liabilities, which cab be raised to 15% if the reserve bank considers it necessary.
(b) The through loans and advances against approved securities.
(c) Under the Banking regulation Act, 1949 and its various amendments, the Reserve Bank has been given extensive powers of supervision and control over the banking system.
These regulatory powers relate to the licensing of banks and their branch expansion : liquidity of assets of the banks: management and methods of working of the banks : amalgamation, reconstruction and liquidation of banks : inspection of banks : etc.
4.
Custodian of Exchange Reserves.
The Reserve Bank is the custodian of India's foreign exchange reserves.
It maintains and stabilizes the external value of the rupee, administers exchange controls and other restrictions imposed by the government, and manages the foreign exchange reserves.
Initially, the stability of exchange rate was maintained through selling and purchasing sterling at fixed rates.
But after India became a member of the international Monetary Fund (IMF) in 1947, the rupee was delinked with sterling and became a multilaterally convertible currency.
Therefore the Reserve Bank now sells and buys foreign currencies, and not sterling alone, in order to achieve the objective of exchange stability.
The Reserve Bank fixes the selling and buying rates of foreign currencies.
All Indian remittances to foreign countries and foreign remittances to India are made through the reserve Bank.
5.
Controller of Credit.
As the central bank of the country, the Reserve Bank undertakes the responsibility of controlling credit in order to ensure internal price stability and promote economic growth.
Through this function, the Reserve Bank attempts to achieve price stability in the country and avoids inflationary and deflationary tendencies in the country.
Price stability is essential for economic development.
The Reserve Bank regulates the money supply in accordance with the changing requirements of the economy.
The Reserve bank makes extensive use of various quantitative and qualitative techniques to effectively control and regulate credit in the country.
6.Oridanary Banking Functions.
The Reserve bank also performs various ordinary banking functions: (a) It accepts deposits from the central government, state governments and even private individuals without interest.
(b) It buys, sells and rediscounts the bills of exchange and promissory notes f the central government, state governments, local authorities, scheduled banks and state cooperative banks, repayable within 90 days.
(d) It buys and sells securities, of the government of India and foreign securities.
(e) It buys from and sells to the scheduled banks foreign exchange for a minimum amount of Rs.
1 lakh.
(f) It can borrow from any scheduled bank in India or from any foreign bank.
(g) It can open an account in the world bank of in some foreign central bank.
(h) It accepts valuables, securities, etc, for keeping them in safe custody.
(i) It buys and sells gold and silver.
7.
Miscellaneous functions.
In addition to central banking and ordinary banking functions, the Reserve bank performs the following miscellaneous functions: (a) Banker's training college has been set up to extend training facilities to supervisory staff of commercial banks.
Arrangements have been made to impart training to the cooperative personnel.
(b) the Reserve bank collects and publishes statistical information relating to banking finance, credit, currency, agricultural and industrial production etc.
It also publishes the results of various studies and review of economic situation of the country in its monthly bulletins and periodicals.
8.
Forbidden Business.
Being the central bank of the country, the reserve Bank (a) should not compete with member banks and (b) should keep its assets in liquid form to meet any situation of economic crisis.
Therefore, the Reserve Bank has been forbidden to do certain types of business: (a) It can neither participate in.
nor directly provide financial assistance to any business, trade or industry.
(b) It can neither buy its own shares not those of other banks or commercial and industrial undertakings.
(e) It cannot grant unsecured loans asn advances.
(d) It cannot give loans against mortgage security.
(e) It cannot give interest on deposits.
(f) It cannot draw or accept bills not payable on demand.
(g) It cannot purchase immovable property except for its own offices.
9.
Promotional and Developmental Functions.
Besides the traditional central banking functions, the Reserve Bank also performs a variety of promotional and developmental functions : (a) By encouraging the commercial banks to expand their branches in the semi-urban and rural areas, the Reserve Bank helps (i) to reduce the dependence of the people in these areas on the defective unorganized sector of indigenous bankers and money lenders, and (ii)to develop the banking habits of the people (b) By establishing the Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Reserve Bank helps to develop the banking system of the country, instills confidence of the depositors and avoids bank failures.
(c) through the intuitions like Unit trust of India, the Reserve bank helps to mobilize savings in the country.
(d) Since its inception, the Reserve Bank has been making efforts to promote institutional agricultural credit by developing cooperative credit institutions.
(e) the Reserve bank also helps to promote the process of industrialization in the country by setting up specialized institutions for industrial finance.
(f) It also undertakes measures for developing bill market in the country.
National Income National Income is defined as the sum total of all the goods and services produced in a country, in a particular period of time.
Normally this period consists of one year duration, as a year is neither too short nor long a period.
National product is usually used synonymous with National income.
Alfred Marshall in his 'Principle of Economics' (1949) defines National income as "The labour and capital of a country, acting on its natural resources, produce annually a certain net aggregate of commodities, material and immaterial, including services of all kinds…..and net income due on account of foreign investments must be added in.
This is the true net National income or Revenue of the country or the national dividend."
Irving Fisher defined national income as "The national dividend or income consists solely of services as received by the ultimate consumers, whether from their material or from human environments.
Thus, a piano or an overcoat made for me this year is not a part of this year's income, but an addition to capital.
Only the services rendered to me during this year by these things are income."
Central Statistical Organization defines National income as "National Income is the sum of factor income earned by the normal residents of a country in the form of wages, rent, interest and profit in an accounting year."
Concepts of National Income There are different concepts of National Income, namely; GNP, GDP, NNP, Personal Income and Disposable Income.
Gross National Product (GNP) GNP at market price is sum total of all the goods and services produced in a country during a year and net income from abroad.
GNP is the sum of Gross Domestic Product at Market Price and Net Factor Income from abroad.
(1) (2) (3) Gross Net Factor GNP at Domestic + Income from = Market Price Product at Abroad (1+2) Market Price While calculating GNP, the final goods and services of the following are considered: (a) Consumer goods and services.
(b) Gross private domestic income.
(c) Goods and services produced by Government.
(d) Net income from abroad.
Keynes had suggested three approaches to National Income in his famous book titled 'The General Theory' (1937) namely; 1.
Aggregate expenditure (on consumption and investment goods) approach.
2.
Factor income approach.
3.
Sale proceeds minus cost approach.
Approaches to GNP There are three different approaches to GNP, namely income approach, expenditure approach and product approach.
1.
Income approach In income approach, we find the different categories of Income namely; (1) Wages and salaries (2) Rents (3) Interest (4) Dividends (5) Undistributed corporate profits (6) Mixed incomes (7) Direct taxes (8) Indirect taxes (9) Depreciation (10) Net income from abroad.
2.
Expenditure approach In expenditure approach, we find the different categories of expenditure namely, (1) Private consumption expenditure (2) Gross domestic private income (3) Net foreign income (4) Government expenditure on goods and services.
3.
Product approach In product approach, we find the following categories of output.
(1) Final market value of goods and services (2) Less cost of intermediate goods.
The following factors are to be considered while calculating the GNP: 1.
Only those goods and services which can be measured by Money.
Net Indirect Taxes GNP at Market Price 2.
Market price of final goods and services alone will be considered.
3.
Services which are done free of cost are not considered.
4.
Productions done in current year alone are considered.
5.
Illegal activities are not included.
GNP at Market Price If we multiply the total output produced in one year by their 'Market Prices', we get GNP at market price.
Gross National Product at Factor Cost or Gross National Income The gross national product at factor cost is the difference between gross national product and net indirect taxes.
It is also called gross national income.
Gross national income is the sum total of compensation of employees, operating surplus, mixed income, depreciation and net factor income from abroad.
GNP at factor cost refers to income which the factors of production receive in return for their service alone.
= - + Subsidies Subsidies refer to difference between the Market Price and Cost of Production.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Gross Domestic Product is the market value of the final goods and services produced within the domestic territory of a country during one year inclusive of depreciation.
Components of GDP In GDP we find different components of income namely (1) Wages and salaries (2) Rent (3) Interest (4) Divi- dends (5) Undistributed Profit (6) Mixed income (7) Direct taxes.
GDP at market price GDP at Market Price is estimated by deducting the value of intermediate consumption from the value of output produced by all the producers within the domestic territory of a country.
In other words, it is estimated as the sum total of gross value added at the market price.
Gross domestic product at market price Subsidies GNP at FC Value of Intermediate Consumption (2) Depreciation Depreciation - = Difference between GDP and GNP GDP/I = NI - Net income from abroad.
The major difference between GNP and GDP is that the former includes net income from abroad whereas the latter includes only that income which has been produced within the political boundary of the nation.
Gross Domestic Product at factor cost or gross domestic income.
Gross Domestic Product at factor cost or gross domestic income is the sum total of the compensation of employees, operating surplus and mixed income earned by the factors of production in an accounting year plus depreciation or consumption of fixed capital.
Gross Domestic Product at factor cost can also be estimated by deducting net indirect taxes from gross domestic product at market price.
Net National Product (NNP) In the process of production of goods and services, there will be some depreciation of fixed capital also called as consumption of fixed capital, if the value of depreciation is deducted from the value of gross national product in a year, we obtain the value of net national product.
Thus, NNP at market price is gross national product at market price minus depreciation.
- = NNP at market price - = NNP at Factor Cost Net National Product at factor cost is also called as national income.
Net National Product at factor cost is equal to sum total of value added at factor GDP at Market Price [(1) - (2)] Value of output Produced by all producing units within the Domestic Territory (1) NNP at Market Price GNP at Market Price NNP GNP Social Security Interest on Public Debt Transfer Payments Indirect Tax NDP at Market Price NNP at Market Price cost or net domestic product at factor cost and net factor income from abroad.
= - Income earned by factors of production though participation in the production process such as wages, salaries, rents and profits is also termed as National Income.
Net Domestic Product at Market Price Net Domestic Product at market price is the market value of final goods and services produced by all the producers in the domestic territory of a country during an accounting year exclusive of consumption of fixed capital.
It is equal to the net value added at market price.
Net Domestic Income or Net Domestic Product at Factor Cost "NDI is the income generated in the form of wages, rent, interest and profit in the domestic territory of a country by all the producers (normal residents and non-residents) in an accounting year"(Hanson).
= - + Private Income Central Statistical Organization defines Private Income as "the total of factor income from all sources and current transfers from the government and rest of the world accruing to private sector" or in other words the private income refers to the income from socially accepted source including retained income of corporation.
+ + + - Personal Income Prof. Peterson defines Personal Income as "the income actually received by persons from all sources in the form of current transfer payments and factor income."
Profit and Surplus Public Enterprises NI Subsidies NDP at Factor Cost Net Indirect tax NNP at Factor Cost Direct Taxes Personal Income Undistributed Corporate Profits Private Income Total income received by the citizens of a country from all sources before direct taxes in a year.
= + - Disposable Income Prof. Peterson defined Disposable Income as "the income remaining with individuals after deduction of all taxes levied against their income and their property by the government."
Disposable Income refers to the income actually received by the households from all sources.
The individual can dispose this income according to his wish, as it is derived after deducting direct taxes.
= - - Real Income Goods and services produced in terms of money at current prices will not express/indicate real state often.
Hence, real income is the national income expressed in terms of a general level of prices of a particular year, considered as the base year.
Percapita Income Percapita Income is derived from dividing national income from the total population of the country.
NI PCI = Population DI PI Miscellaneous receipts of the Government Direct Taxes DISCLAIMER The courseware material presented here may contain some text, figures, images and diagrams taken from readily available web sources.
The contents have been prepared for the use of students and faculty members of Silicon Institute of Technology as additional reference material to complement classroom teaching, and not for any commercial purpose.
FOREWORD This is the second iteration of preparing our own courseware material, after successful completion of a similar task undertaken a few years ago.
These contents have been carefully prepared and should serve as excellent auxiliary material for both instructors and students.
The Special Academic Group, Autonomy (SAGA) was formed for the sole purpose of preparing courseware contents primarily in the first-year theory subjects; a few second-year subjects were also included.
The subjects for the first year were - Basic Electrical Engineering, Basic Electronics Engineering, Computer Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms, Engineering Mathematics I and II, Engineering Physics, Engineering Chemistry, Constitution of India, Environmental Science and Engineering and Communicative and Technical English.
For the second year, the subjects for which courseware material was prepared were Analog Electronic Circuits, Digital Systems Design, Circuit Theory and Measurements and Instruments.
Faculty members from all the departments contributed to the task.
They were, in no particular order, Nalini Singh, Bimal Meher, Saumyaranjan Dash, Mukti Routray, Susmita Biswal, Manasa Dash, Bipin Tripathy, Sibasankar Nayak, Janmejay Senapati, Subrat Sahu, Pradeep Moharana, Rupambika Pattanaik, Dhananjay Tripathy, Jagadish Patra, Sachin Das, Deepak Ranjan Nayak, Amulya Roul, Bodhisattva Dash, Sanghamitra Das, Gyana Ranjan Biswal, Nibedita Swain and Rajan Mishra.
The entire group worked diligently to successfully complete the task which included a peer review of the material.
I take this opportunity to thank all the members of the SAGA group for a job well done.
I sincerely hope that this courseware material comes in handy and is utilized to the fullest extent.
These are readily available additional resources prepared in accordance with the Silicon autonomy syllabus, to complement textbooks and classroom lectures.
If there are any errors, I would be grateful if they are brought to my notice so that we can correct them in subsequent versions.
Dr. Jaideep Talukdar, Principal Silicon Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar December 2020 : WAVES 1.0 Wave: a wave can be described as a disturbance that travels through a medium, transporting energy from one location to another location without transporting matter.
As a disturbance moves through a medium from one particle to its adjacent particle, energy is being transported from one end of the medium to the other.
The general name of this disturbance or wave is called progressive wave.
Types of waves: Waves are of two types Transverse wave Longitudinal wave If the disturbance takes place perpendicular to the direction of propagation of wave, the wave is called transverse wave.
If the disturbance takes place along the direction of propagation of wave, then it is called longitudinal wave.
Wave as a periodic variation in space and time A wave is a disturbance that travels through a medium from one location to another.
A wave is the motion of a disturbance that moves through a medium in such a manner that at any position, the displacement of the particle of the medium is a function of time, and at any instant, the displacement of the particles of the medium is a function of the position at that point.
The disturbance that is propagated is called a progressive or a travelling wave.
During its propagation, energy is transferred through the medium At a given instant, the wave periodically varies with position and at a given position, wave varies periodically with time.
Example: In sound wave, the disturbance is a pressure variation in a medium.
In light wave, the disturbance is the variation of the strength of electric and magnetic fields.
1.1 Wave in one dimension: If we consider the initial phase factor Ø 𝜓(𝑥,𝑡) = 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛( 𝑘𝑥± 𝑤𝑡+ Ø) Wave Characteristics: ❖ Amplitude (A) - Maximum displacement of particle of the medium from its equilibrium point.
The bigger the amplitude, the more energy the wave carries.
❖ Wavelength () - Distance between two consecutive crests (max positive displacement) or between two consecutive trough (max negative displacement).
❖ Wave vector or propagation vector (k) - 2 /  ❖ Period (T) -The time required for one complete oscillation.
It is the reciprocal of frequency: T = 1 / f. ❖ Frequency (f) - The number of oscillations/vibrations per second.
The SI unit for frequency is the Hertz (Hz).
❖ Wave speed (v) - How fast the wave is moving (the disturbance).
Speed depends on the medium.
It is expressed as v =  f. 1.2 Wave equation in differential form: Let's take the equation, 𝜓(𝑥,𝑡) = 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛( 𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙) 𝜕𝜓 𝜕𝑡= −𝑤𝐴𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙) 𝜕2𝜓 𝜕𝑡2 = −𝑤2𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙) = −𝑤2𝜓 Again, 𝜕𝜓 𝜕𝑥= 𝑘𝐴𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙) 𝜕2𝜓 𝜕𝑥2 = −𝑘2𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙) == −𝑘2𝜓 )] ( sin[ ) sin( ) , ( vt x k A wt kx A t x  =  =  = 𝑘2 𝑤2 𝜕2𝜓 𝜕𝑡2 = 1 𝑣2 𝜕2𝜓 𝜕𝑡2 So, 𝝏𝟐𝝍 𝝏𝒙𝟐= 𝟏 𝒗𝟐 𝝏𝟐𝝍 𝝏𝒕𝟐 It is the general wave equation, in second order differential form with wave velocity/ phase velocity 𝒗= 𝒘 𝒌.
1.3 Reflection and transmission of a transverse wave at boundary of two media When a wave strikes an obstacle, or comes to the end of the medium in which it is traveling, part of it is reflected and a part is transmitted ✓ Incident wave - the wave that strikes the boundary ✓ Reflected wave - the wave that is returned as a result of reflection ✓ Transmitted wave - the wave that is propagated to the second medium 1.3.1 Rarer to Denser medium: Parameters Reflected Component Transmitted Component Amplitude Decreases Decreases Velocity No change Decreases Frequency No Change No change Wavelength No change Decreases Phase Changes by π No change 1.3.2 Denser to Rarer medium Parameters Reflected Component Transmitted Component Amplitude Decreases Decreases Velocity No change Increases Frequency No Change No change Wavelength No change Increases Phase No change No change Superposition 2.1 Principle of Superposition: The principle of superposition states that the resultant displacement of a particle of a medium acted upon by two or more waves simultaneously is the algebraic sum of the displacement of the same particle due to individual waves.
Let the displacement of the particle due to individual waves are 1 and 2 Then the resultant displacement is 𝜳= 𝜳𝟏+ 𝜳𝟐 (If both are in same direction) and 𝜳= 𝜳𝟏−𝜳𝟐 (If both are in opposite direction) 2.2 Types of Superposition: Coherent Superposition Incoherent Superposition Coherent Superposition Phase difference remains constant.
The resultant intensity differs from sum of the individual intensity.
𝐼≠𝐼1 + 𝐼2.
It gives an interference (fringe) pattern.
Incoherent Superposition Phase difference changes frequently and randomly.
The intensity of the resultant wave is equal to the sum of the intensities of the component waves.
𝐼= 𝐼1 + 𝐼2.
Cannot form interference pattern because their intensity is constant.
2.3 Two beam Superposition: Let's take two beams or two waves having different amplitude, same frequency and different phases superpose 1 = 𝐴1sin (𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙1) 2 = 𝐴2sin (𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙2) The resultant wave is = 1 + 2 = 𝐴1 sin(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙1) + 𝐴2sin (𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙2) = 𝐴1 [sin(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡)𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙1 + cos (𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡)𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙1] + 𝐴2 [sin(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡)𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙2 + cos (𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡)𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙2] = sin(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡)[𝐴1𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙1 + 𝐴2𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙2]+ cos(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡)[𝐴1𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙1 + 𝐴2𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙2 ] Let 𝐴𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙= [𝐴1𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙1 + 𝐴2𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙2] 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙= [𝐴1𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙1 + 𝐴2𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙2 ] Then = sin(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡)𝐴𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙+ cos(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡)𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙 = 𝐴sin (𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙) So the resultant wave is of same nature as that of the incident wave.
Where A is the resultant amplitude and 𝜙 is the resultant phase.
So 𝐴2 = (𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙)2 + (𝐴𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙)2 = (𝐴1𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙1 + 𝐴2𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙2 )2 + (𝐴1𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙1 + 𝐴2𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙2)2 = 𝐴1 2+𝐴2 2 + 2𝐴1𝐴2cos(𝜙1 −𝜙2) The third term of above equation is the interference term.
The resultant intensity depends upon the interference term.
2.3.1 Coherent superposition: In this case phase difference remains constant, so (𝜙1 −𝜙2) is constant Case I If (𝜙1 −𝜙2) = 2𝑛𝜋, where 𝑛 𝑖𝑠 𝑎𝑛 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑒𝑟𝑒= 0,±1, ±2, ±3, …… … … Then cos (𝜙1 −𝜙2)= 1, 𝐴2 = (𝐴1 + 𝐴2)2 So intensity 𝐼= 𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑥= (𝐴1 + 𝐴2)2 Special case If 𝐴1 = 𝐴2 = 𝑎, Then 𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑥= 4𝑎2, that means the resultant intensity (intensity of bright fringe) is four times the intensity of the individual wave.
Case II If (𝜙1 −𝜙2) = (2𝑛+ 1)𝜋, where 𝑛 𝑖𝑠 𝑎𝑛 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑒𝑟𝑒= 0, ±1, ±2, ±3, … …… … Then cos (𝜙1 −𝜙2)= -1, 𝐴2 = (𝐴1 −𝐴2)2 So intensity 𝐼= 𝐼𝑚𝑖𝑛= (𝐴1 −𝐴2)2 Special case If 𝐴1 = 𝐴2 = 𝑎 , Then 𝐼𝑚𝑖𝑛= 0, that means the resultant intensity is zero.
Dark fringe is formed.
So, in case of coherent superposition alternate bright and dark fringes appear.
2.3.2 Incoherent superposition: In this case phase difference changes frequently and randomly, so any particular value cannot be taken.
So, time average value of cos (Ø1 −Ø2) is considered.
But< cos(𝜙1 −𝜙2) >= 0, as its value varies in between +1 to -1.
So, 𝐴2 = 𝐴1 2+𝐴2 2 Special case If 𝐴1 = 𝐴2 = 𝑎 , then 𝐴2 = 2𝑎2 , which is constant always.
So, no fringe pattern is observed.
Intensity distribution curve 2.4 Multiple beams Superposition: Let's take a number of beams or waves having different amplitude, same frequency and different phases superpose 1 = 𝐴1sin (𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙1) 2 = 𝐴2sin (𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙2) 3 = 𝐴3sin (𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙3) n = 𝐴nsin (𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙𝑛 ) The resultant wave is = 1 + 2 + 3 + ………+n = ∑i n i=1 = ∑𝐴𝑖 𝑠 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑖𝑛(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ 𝜙𝑖) Where 𝐴𝑖and Ø𝑖 represents amplitude and phase of the ith component wave.
By comparison with two beam superposition the resultant wave is 𝛹= 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+ Ø) where 𝐴 𝑠𝑖𝑛Ø = [𝐴1𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙1 + 𝐴2𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙2 + 𝐴3𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙3 + ⋯+ 𝐴𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙𝑛]=∑ 𝐴𝑖 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙𝑖 and 𝐴 𝑐𝑜𝑠Ø = [𝐴1𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙1 + 𝐴2𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙2 + 𝐴3𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙3 + ⋯+ 𝐴𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙𝑛]=∑ 𝐴𝑖 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙𝑖 So 𝐴2 = (∑ 𝐴𝑖 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑠𝑖𝑛Ø𝑖)2 + (∑ 𝐴𝑖 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙𝑖) 2 =∑ 𝐴𝑖 2 + 2∑ 𝐴𝑖𝐴𝑗cos (𝜙𝑖 𝑛 𝑖,𝑗=1 𝑖≠𝑗 𝑛 𝑖=1 −𝜙𝑗) Discussion: 2.4.1 Coherent superposition: (𝜙𝑖−𝜙𝑗) remains constant (𝜙𝑖−𝜙𝑗) =2nπ where 𝑛= 0,±1, ±2, ±3, … …… … So,cos(𝜙𝑖−𝜙𝑗) =1 Then 𝐴2 = =∑ 𝐴𝑖 2 + 2 ∑ 𝐴𝑖𝐴𝑗 𝑛 𝑖,𝑗=1 𝑖≠𝑗 𝑛 𝑖=1 Example Let n=3 so 𝐴2 = 𝐴1 2 + 𝐴2 2 + 𝐴3 2 + 2𝐴1𝐴2 + 2𝐴2𝐴3 + 2𝐴1𝐴3 =(𝐴1 + 𝐴2 + 𝐴3)2 Special Case: If 𝐴1 = 𝐴2 = 𝐴3 = 𝑎 Then 𝐴2 = (3𝑎)2=9𝑎2 So, in general 𝑰𝒄𝒐𝒉= (𝒏𝒂)𝟐 where 'n' is the number of beams superpose.
2.4.2.
Incoherent superposition: (𝜙𝑖−𝜙𝑗) changes frequently and randomly So < cos (𝜙𝑖−𝜙𝑗) >= 0 Then 𝐴2 =∑ 𝐴𝑖 2 𝑛 𝑖=1 Example Let n=3 so 𝐴2 = 𝐴1 2 + 𝐴2 2 + 𝐴3 2 Then 𝐴2 = 3𝑎2 So, in general 𝑰𝒊𝒏𝒄𝒐𝒉= 𝒏𝒂𝟐 where 'n' is the number of beams superpose.
𝑰𝒄𝒐𝒉= 𝒏𝑰𝒊𝒏𝒄𝒐𝒉 2.5.
Superposition of multiple waves with a constant and successive phase difference: Consider 'N' number of waves having same amplitudes, frequencies but phase varies with a constant amount (Ф, say) and are represented as follows; 𝜓1 = 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡) 𝜓2 = 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡+ 𝜙) 𝜓3 = 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡+ 2𝜙) 𝜓𝑁= 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡+ [𝑁−1]𝜙) Phase difference between successive waves is Ø.
The resultant superposed wave can be written as; 𝜓= 𝜓1 + 𝜓2 + ⋯+ 𝜓𝑁 In order to get the resultant wave in a convenient way we can express the wave function in exponential form 𝜓1 = 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡) 𝜓2 = 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡+𝜙) 𝜓3 = 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡+2𝜙) Similarly, 𝜓𝑁= 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡+(𝑁−1)𝜙) So the resultant superposed wave can be written as; 𝜓= 𝜓1 + 𝜓2 + ⋯+ 𝜓𝑁 𝜓(𝑥, 𝑡) = 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡){1+ 𝑒𝑖𝜙+ 𝑒𝑖2𝜙+ 𝑒𝑖3𝜙+ ⋯+ 𝑒𝑖(𝑁−1)𝜙}……………(i) Using the Algebraic Formulation; 1 + 𝑥+ 𝑥2 + 𝑥3 + ⋯+ 𝑥𝑚= 1−𝑥𝑚+1 1−𝑥 Now, equation (i) can be written as; 𝜓= 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡) { 1−𝑒𝑖𝑁𝜙 1−𝑒𝑖𝜙} = 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡){ 𝑒𝑖𝑁𝜙−1 𝑒𝑖𝜙−1 } With suitable arrangement of the exponent power terms; 𝜓= 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡) 𝑒𝑖(𝑁2 ⁄ )𝜙 [𝑒𝑖(𝑁2 ⁄ )𝜙−𝑒−𝑖(𝑁2 ⁄ )𝜙] 𝑒𝑖(𝜙2 ⁄ )[𝑒𝑖(𝜙2 ⁄ )−𝑒−𝑖(𝜙2 ⁄ )] 𝜓= 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡+𝑁−1 2 𝜙) (2𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑁𝜙 2 ) 2𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙 2 = 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝜔𝑡+𝑁−1 2 𝜙) 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑁𝜙 2 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙 2 ………….
(ii) If we represent the resultant wave function as 𝜓= 𝑅𝑒𝑖(𝑘𝑥−𝑤𝑡+𝜃)…………(iii) where R------- Resultant amplitude 𝜃⋯⋯⋯𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡 𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒 Then comparing equations (ii) and (iii), we have 𝑅= 𝐴 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑁𝜙 2 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜙 2 and 𝜃= 𝑁−1 2 𝜙 We will apply this resultant amplitude expression in diffraction phenomena like, single slit and multiple slit (diffraction grating).
3.1 Interference: We have already discussed that in case of coherent superposition, there is redistribution of light intensity leading to interference.
Definition: When two light waves from different coherent sources meet together (superpose), then the resultant amplitude (or intensity) in the region of superposition is different than that of the amplitude (or intensity) of individual waves.
This modification in the distribution of intensity (light energy) due to superposition of two or more light waves is called "Interference of light.
Examples ✓ One of the best examples of interference is demonstrated by the light reflected from a film of oil floating on water.
✓ The thin film of a soap bubble, which reflects a spectrum of beautiful colors when illuminated by natural or artificial light sources.
Interference is of two types: ❖ Constructive interference ❖ Destructive interference Constructive interference occurs when the wave amplitudes reinforce each other, building a wave of even greater amplitude.
It occurs when the crests of one wave overlap with the crests of the other wave, and troughs of one wave with the troughs of the other wave, causing an increase in wave amplitude/intensity.
Or the resultant amplitude is the sum of the amplitudes of the waves Condition: Path difference = nλ or 2n ( 𝜆 2) Phase difference = 2nπ, n is an integer = 0,±1, ±2, ±3, …… … … Destructive interference occurs when the wave amplitudes oppose each other, resulting in waves of reduced amplitude.
It occurs when the crests of one wave overlap with the troughs of the other wave, causing a decrease in wave amplitude/intensity.
Or if we take two waves then the resultant amplitude is the difference of two amplitudes, then that is called destructive interference.
Condition: Path difference = (2n + 1) 𝜆 2 Phase difference = (2n + 1)π, n is an integer = 0,±1,±2, ±3, …… … … (Phase difference = 𝟐𝝅 𝝀 x path difference) 3.2 Methods of obtaining interference: i.
Division of Amplitude: In this method, the amplitude of the incident beam is divided into two or more parts either by partial reflection or refraction.
Thus, we have coherent beams produced by division of amplitude.
These beams travel different optical paths and are finally united together to produce interference.
Examples are Newton's rings, Michelson interferometer.
ii.
Division of Wave front: Under this category, the coherent sources are obtained by dividing the wave front, originating from a common source, by employing mirrors, biprisms or lenses.
These beams travel unequal optical path and finally reunite to produce interference.
Examples are Fresnel' biprism, Lloyds single mirror.
3.2.1 Condition for Interference of light: To obtain a permanent or stationary interference pattern the conditions are classified into following three categories ▪ Condition for sustained interference ▪ Condition for clear observation ▪ Condition for good contrast between maxima and minima 3.2.2 Condition for Sustained Interference Pattern: ▪ The two interfering wave should be coherent i.e., both light waves are in same phase or maintain constant phase difference between them.
▪ The source should have same frequency.
▪ Both the wave must be in same set of polarization.
3.2.3 Condition for clear observation of fringes ✓ The distance between the coherent sources should small.
✓ The distance between the source and screen must be large.
✓ The background should be dark.
3.2.4 Condition for Good Contrast between maxima and minima ✓ The amplitude of the both interfering wave be the equal or very nearly equal.
✓ The sources must be narrow.
✓ The sources must be monochromatic.
Newton's Rings (Fringes due to Division of Amplitude) 4.1: Description: When a plane-convex lens of large focal length is placed as a plane glass plate, a thin film of air is formed between the plano-convex lens and plane glass plate.
The thickness of the air film is very small at the point of contact and gradually increased from the centre upwards.
If a monochromatic light is allowed to fall normally on this film, a set of alternate dark and bright fringes will be seen in the film.
The fringes are concentric circle.
These circles or rings are called Newton's rings.
Normal incidence of monochromatic light on the plano- convex lens will produces bright and dark concentric rings around the point of contact between the lens and the glass plate.
The phenomenon first explained by Newton so called Newton's rings.
Experimental arrangement: S - Source, producing monochromatic light like, sodium light L1 - Convergent lens, used to produce parallel rays G - A glass plate, making an angle 450 with the direction of incident light, so that vertically reflected downward reflected rays are produced L - A plano-convex lens of large radius of curvature, placed on a plane glass plate P, with its convex surface facing upward M - A travelling microscope, which is used to see the fringe patterns 4.1.1 Explanation of formation of Fringes: Newton's rings are formed as a result of interference between light wave reflected from the upper and lower surfaces of the air film.
Fig.
below shows that from a single incident ray (A), two reflected rays (E&F) are produced by division of amplitude.
These two reflected rays are coherence and superimpose to produce interference pattern.
Suppose, the radius of curvature of the plano-convex lens is R and the thickness of the air film is 't'.
The ray E and F are coherent as they produced from same incident ray A.
The effective path difference between the interfering rays is ∆= 2µ𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑟+ 𝜆 2 For air, μ=1 and for normal incidence, r = 0 So effective path difference in this case is ∆= 2𝑡+ 𝜆 2 ……………………(1) At the centre, 𝑡= 0 So effective path difference ∆= 𝜆 2 , this is the condition for minimum intensity.
So the centre is dark.
For the bright fringes ∆= 𝒏𝝀 So 2𝑡+ 𝜆 2 = 𝒏𝝀 Or, 2𝑡= (2𝑛−1) 𝜆 2 ……………………………………… (2) For the dark rings ∆= (𝟐𝒏+ 𝟏) 𝝀 𝟐 So 2𝑡+ 𝜆 2 = (𝟐𝒏+ 𝟏) 𝝀 𝟐𝒏= 𝟎, 𝟏,𝟐, 𝟑,𝟒….
Or, 2𝑡= 𝒏𝝀 ……………………………………………… (3) It is clear that a bright or dark fringe of any order n depend upon the thickness of the air film.
Since t is constant along a circle with its centre at the point of contact, the fringes are in the form of concentric circle.
4.1.2 Diameter of Bright Rings Substituting the value of t in eqn.
(2) For bright rings So from eqn.
5 Thus, the diameters of bright rings are proportional to the square root of the odd number The separations between successive rings are 0.732:0.504:0.410.
4.1.3 Diameter of Dark Rings From equation (3) and (4) If D is the diameter of dark ring Thus, the diameters of dark ring are proportional to the square root of natural number 4.1.4 Newton's rings by transmitted light: The effective path difference between the interfering rays is ∆= 2µ𝑡𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑟 For μ=1 and for normal incidence r=0 So effective path difference in this case is ∆= 2𝑡 At centre 𝑡= 0 So effective path difference ∆= 0 , this is the condition for maxima so center is bright.
For the bright fringes ∆ = 𝒏𝝀 So 2𝑡 = 𝒏𝝀 So, for bright fringe 𝐷𝑛2 = 4𝑅𝑛𝝀 so 𝐷𝑛= √4𝑅𝑛𝝀 For the dark rings ∆ = (𝟐𝒏−𝟏) 𝝀 𝟐 So 2𝑡= (𝟐𝒏−𝟏) 𝝀 𝟐𝒏= 𝟏,𝟐, 𝟑,𝟒….
So 𝐷𝑛2 = 2𝑅𝝀(𝟐𝒏−𝟏) So 𝐷𝑛= √𝟐𝑹𝝀(𝟐𝒏−𝟏) Hence, the fringe patterns, in reflected and transmitted light are complimentary.
4.1.5 Application of Newton's rings: 4.1.5.1 Determination of wavelength of light: By forming Newton's rings and measuring the radii of the rings formed, we can calculate the wavelength of the light used if the radius of curvature of the lens is known.
Let R be the radius of curvature of the lens and 𝜆 is the wavelength of the light used.
So the diameter of the nth dark ring can be written as Dn2 = 4 n 𝜆𝑅 (1) Similarly, the diameter of the (n +m) th dark ring is D(n+m) 2 = 4 (𝑛+m) 𝜆𝑅 (2) Subtracting equation (1) from (2) we get D(n+m) 2 −Dn2 = 4 (𝑛+m) 𝜆𝑅 - 4 n 𝜆𝑅 = 4mRλ Or, λ = 𝐃(𝐧+𝐦) 𝟐 −𝐃𝐧𝟐 𝟒𝒎𝑹 Using the above relation, wavelength of the monochromatic light can be calculated 4.1.5.2 Determination of refractive index of a liquid using Newton's rings: By forming Newton's rings and measuring the diameter of the rings formed, we can calculate the refractive index of the liquid.
In air film, the diameters of the nth and (n+m)th dark rings are measured with the help of travelling microscope.
D(n+m) 2 −Dn2 = 4 (𝑛+m) 𝜆𝑅 - 4 n 𝜆𝑅 = 4mRλ ………………………… (3) Now, the air film is replaced by liquid film (refractive index µ).
In liquid film, the diameters of the same nth and (n+m)th dark rings are 𝐷′𝑛 and 𝐷′(n+m) are measured with the help of travelling microscope.
D′n2 = 4 n 𝜆𝑅/µ and D′(n+m) 2 = 4 (𝑛+m) 𝜆𝑅/µ So, D′(n+m) 2 - D′n2 = 4mRλ/µ ………………………………………..(4) Dividing equation (3) by (4) 𝐃(𝐧+𝐦) 𝟐 −𝐃𝐧𝟐 𝐃′(𝐧+𝐦) 𝟐 -𝐃′𝐧𝟐 = µ Using the above relation 𝜇 can be calculated.
Numerical: 1.
A wave along s string is given by the equation 𝑦= 0.01 sin(50𝜋𝑡−31.4𝑥) 𝑚 calculate the speed with which the wave travels.
Sol: V= 𝑤 𝑘= 50𝜋 31.4 = 5𝑚/𝑠 2.
Two coherent sources, whose intensity ratio is 9:4, produce interference fringes.
Find the ratio of maximum to minimum intensity of the fringe system.
Sol: Let I1 and I2 be the intensities, and a1 and a2 the amplitudes of the two interfering beams.
We can write 𝐼1 𝐼2 = 𝑎12 𝑎22 or, 𝑎1 𝑎2 = √ 𝐼1 𝐼2 = 3 2 If 𝑎1 =3x then 𝑎2 = 2x Now, 𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝐼𝑚𝑖𝑛 = (𝑎1+𝑎2)2 (𝑎1−𝑎2)2 = (3𝑥+2𝑥)2 (3𝑥−2𝑥)2 = 25𝑥2 𝑥2 = 25 1 3.
Find the ratio of the intensity at the center of a bright fringe in an interference pattern to the intensity at a point one-quarter of the distance between two fringes from the center.
Sol: Resultant intensity I = 2𝑎2( 1 + cos ϕ ) Where a is the amplitude of the wave.
At the center, ϕ = 0 So, I0 = 2𝑎2( 1 + cos ϕ ) = 2𝑎2( 1 + cos 0 ) = 4𝑎2 At one-quarter of the distance between two fringes from the center, ϕ = π/2 I1 = 2𝑎2( 1 + cos ϕ ) = 2𝑎2( 1 + cos π/2)= 2𝑎2 So, I0 : I1 = 4𝑎2: 2𝑎2 = 2 :1 4.
In a two source interference experiment, let 'p' be a point on the screen, which is equidistant from both the sources.
If one source is closed the intensity at 'p' is 0.02 watt/m2 then what will be the intensity at 'p' when both sources are opened?
Sol: 'P' is the point of central principal maxima I1=0.02 watt/m2 Resultant intensity I= 4I1=0.08 watt/m2 5.
Twenty five sinusoidal waves of equal amplitude superpose incoherently to produce a resultant intensity of 0.5 watt/m2.
What would be the maximum possible resultant intensity if the superpose coherently?
Sol: In case of incoherent superposition, Iin-coherent = na2 =nI, and in case of coherent superposition, Icoherent = n2a2 =n2I So, Icoherent = n Iin-coherent = 25 × 0.5 = 12.5 watt/m2.
6.
Newton's rings are observed normally in reflected light of wavelength 5893 Å.
The diameter of the 10th dark ring is 0.005 m. Find the radius of curvature of the lens and the thickness of the film.
Sol: Dn2 = 4 n 𝜆 𝑅 Here, Dn = 0.005 m, n=10, 𝜆 = 5893 × 10-9 m. Now, R = Dn2 4 n λ = 1.06 m = 106 cm If t be the thickness of the film corresponding to a ring of diameter D, then we have 2t = Dn2 4 R = 6 × 10-6 m or, t = 3 × 10-6 m 7.
If in a Newton's rings experiment, the air in the interspace is replaced by a liquid of refractive index 1.33, in what proportion would the diameter of a ring change?
Sol: (Dn2)𝑎𝑖𝑟 (Dn2)𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑 = µ or, (𝐷𝑛)𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑 (𝐷𝑛)𝑎𝑖𝑟 = √ 1 µ =0.867 The rings are contracted to 0.867 their previous diameter.
8.
In a Newton's rings experiment in air, the diameter of 10th dark ring is 0.272 cm and that of 15th dark ring is 0.555 cm.
If the radius of curvature of the plano-convex lens is 200 cm, calculate the wavelength of the monochromatic light used.
Sol: 𝐷𝑛 = 0.272 cm 𝐷𝑛+𝑝 = 0.555 cm 𝑛= 10, n + m =15, m = 5 𝑅 = 200 cm We know that λ = D(n+m) 2 − Dn2 4𝑚𝑅 or, λ = 0.5552− 0.2722 4×5×200 = 5851 Å.
9.
In a Newton's rings experiment, the diameter of the 10th bright ring changes from 1.5 cm to 1.27 cm when a liquid is introduced between the plate and the lens.
Calculate the refractive index of the liquid.
10.
In a Newton's rings experiment, the diameter of the 5th ring was 0.336 cm and the diameter of the 15th ring was 0.59 cm.
Find the radius of curvature of the plano convex lens if the wavelength of light is 5890 Å.
Questions: Short & medium answer type 1.
Write the difference between coherent and incoherent superposition.
2.
Discuss why two independent sources of light of the same wavelength cannot produce interference fringes 3.
Do you expect any fringe pattern in case of incoherent superposition?
Give justification to your answer.
4.
Find the ratio of intensity at the centre of a bright fringe to the intensity at a point one quarter of the distance between two fringes from the centre.
5.
Write down the condition for the destructive interference in terms of phase difference and in terms of path difference.
6.
Write the conditions of sustained interference pattern.
7.
Write the conditions for good contrast between dark and bright fringes.
8.
What are the different methods of obtaining interference pattern?
Give example of each.
9.
Show the intensity distribution curve in an interference pattern.
10.
Why the fringes in Newton's ring interference are circular?
11.
In a Newton's ring experiment the center is bright, whether it is formed by reflected light or transmitted light.
Justify your answer.
12.
In a Newton's ring experiment the center is dark, whether it is formed by reflected light or transmitted light.
Justify your answer.
13.
Why the planoconvex lens has large radius of curvature in Newton's ring experiment?
14.
In a Newton's ring experiment, the fringes near to the center are wider than the fringes away from the centre.
Justify it why?
15.
Write down the formula for the refractive index of a liquid determined by In a Newton's ring experiment.
16.
Explain how refractive index of liquid can be determined by Newton's rings method.
Long answer type 1.
Show that the resultant wave due to the superposition of two harmonic waves of same frequency, different phases and travelling in same direction is also harmonic.
Find the amplitude and phase of the resultant wave.
2.
Show that coherent superposition leads to interference pattern, discuss it with two beams having different amplitude, different phases propagating in same direction.
3.
Draw the schematic diagram for production of Newton's rings with reflected light.
Explain how will u obtained two coherent waves.
4.
With a suitable diagram, explain the formation of Newton's rings.
Derive the expression for the diameter of Newton's rings formed by transmitted light.
Explain why the fringes in Newton's rings interference are circular.
5.
Explain the formation of fringes in a Newton's rings in reflected light with a suitable diagram.
Prove that in reflected light (i) diameters of the dark rings are proportional to the square root of natural numbers, and (ii) diameters of the bright rings are proportional to the square root of odd natural numbers.
DIFFRACTION 5.1 Diffraction is the slight bending of light as it passes around the edge of an object.
The amount of bending depends on the relative size of the wavelength of light to the size of the opening.
If the opening is much larger than the light's wavelength, the bending will be almost unnoticeable.
Diffraction is the spreading out of waves as they pass through an aperture or around objects.
It occurs significantly when the size of the aperture or obstacle is of similar linear dimensions to the wavelength of the incident wave.
The essential condition for diffraction to occur is that the wavelength of light should be comparable to that of the size of the object/obstacle.
It might also occur if the size of the object is less than the wavelength of light.
It is due to the interaction among the secondary wavelets which are not blocked off by the obstacle.
Diffraction of light Diffraction pattern The most striking examples of diffraction are those that involve light; for example, the closely spaced tracks on a CD or DVD act as a diffraction grating to form the familiar rainbow pattern seen when looking at a disc.
Types of diffraction (Fresnel diffraction and Fraunhofer diffraction) Characteristics Fresnel diffraction Fraunhofer diffraction Observation distance Either the source or screen or both are at finite distance from the obstacle The source and the screen are effectively at infinite distance from the obstacle Requirement of lens Lens are not required Lens (usually 02) are required Wave fronts Cylindrical or spherical wave fronts Plane wave fronts Diffraction pattern Shape and intensity of diffraction pattern change as the waves propagate downstream of the scattering source Shape and intensity remain constant Difference between Diffraction and Interference Interference Diffraction Interference may be defined as waves emerging from two different coherent sources, producing different wave fronts.
Diffraction on the other hand can be termed as secondary waves that emerge from the different parts of the same wave.
In interference the intensity of all the positions on maxima are equal.
In diffraction, there is a variance of the intensity of all maxima positions.
The width of the fringes in interference may be equal (bi-prism) or may not be equal (Newton's rings).
The widths of the fringes are not equal in diffraction.
It is absolutely dark in the region of minimum intensity, in the case of interference.
In the case of diffraction, the position of minima is not perfectly dark If the number of sources are few such as two sources, then they are referred to as interference sources.
If the number of sources is many, that is more than two then it is referred to as diffraction sources.
Movement of diffraction pattern Move along the corresponding shift in the object Remains in a fixed position 5.1.1 Diffraction due to Single Slit (Fraunhofer diffraction) .
'AB' is a narrow slit of width 'e' perpendicular to the plane of the paper.
Consider a plane wavefront 'ww' originated from a monochromatic source of wavelength 'λ' propagating normal to the slit be incident on it.
After diffraction Let the diffracted rays are focused by using a convex lens and the screen placed at the focal plane of the lens.
According to Hygen's theory, each point of the wave front in the plane of the slit is a source of secondary wavelets.
The secondary wavelets traveling normal to the slits are brought to focus by the lens at the point P0 on the screen.
So, the point P0 must be the point of maxima called as central principal maxima.
In order to consider all the secondary wavelets originated and propagated in different directions, consider the secondary wavelets in the direction of' θ' are brought to the focus by the lens to the point P1 on the screen as shown in the figure.
The intensity at the point P1 is either minimum or maximum and depends upon the path difference between the secondary waves originating from the corresponding points of the wave front.
Theory: In order to find out the intensity at P1, draw a perpendicular AC on BR.
The path difference between secondary wavelets from A and B in directionθ is BC i.e., So, the phase difference, Let us consider that the width of the slit is divided into 'n' equal parts and the amplitude of the wave from each part is 'a'.
So, the phase difference between two consecutive points ............(2.32) Then the resultant amplitude R is calculated by using the method of vector addition of amplitudes The resultant amplitude of n number of waves having same amplitude 'a' and having common phase difference of ' ' is ...................(2.33) Substituting the value of in equation (2.33) 𝑅= 𝑎 sin (𝑛 2(2𝜋 𝑛𝜆)𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃) sin (1 2)1 𝑛 2𝜋 𝜆𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃 So, 𝑅= 𝑎 sin ((𝜋 𝜆)𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃) sin1 n 𝜋 𝜆𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃 ............(2.34) Substituting in equation 2.34 As is small value; and na = A Therefore, ..............(2.35) Therefore, the Intensity is given by .........(2.36) Case (i): Principal Maximum: Eqn (2.35) takes maximum value for =0 or The condition The condition means that this maximum is formed by the secondary wavelets which travel normally to the slit along OPo and focus at Po.
This maximum is known as "Principal maximum".
Intensity of Principal maxima Therefore Case (ii): Minimum Intensity positions: For minimum intensity, sin =0.
The values of ' ' which satisfy are where ...(2.37) In the above eq.
(2.37) n = 0 is not applicable because corresponds to principal maximum.
Therefore, the positions according to eq.
(2.37) are on either side of the principal maximum.
Case (iii): Secondary maximum: In addition to principal maximum at = 0, there are weak secondary maxima between minima positions.
The positions of these weak secondary maxima can be obtained with the rule of finding maxima and minima of a given function in calculus.
So, differentiating eqn (2.35) and equating to zero, we have Because correspond to minima positions so, 𝛼𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼−𝑠𝑖𝑛𝛼= 0 ...........(2.38) The values of ' ' satisfying the eqn (2.38) are obtained graphically by plotting the curves and on the same graph.
The points of intersection of the two curves gives the values of ' ' for which satisfy eqn (2.38).
The points of intersections are But , gives principal maximum, substituting the values of '' in eqn(2.36), we get and so on.
From the above expressions, Imax, I1, I2, I3… it is evident that most of the incident light is concentrated at the principal maximum.
5.1.2 Intensity distribution graph: A graph showing the variation of intensity with ' ' is as shown in the adjacent figure 5.1.3 Plane diffraction grating [Diffraction due to N-Slits (Grating)]: An arrangement consisting of large number of parallel slits of the same width and separated by equal opaque spaces is known as Diffraction grating.
Plane diffraction grating consists of a number of parallel and equidistant lines ruled on an optically plane and parallel glass plate by a fine diamond point.
Each ruled line behaves as an opaque line while the transparent portion between two consecutive ruled lines behaves as a slit.
If a is the width of transparency and b is width of opacity (width of ruling lines) then a+b is called grating element.
Theory: A section of a plane transmission grating AB placed perpendicular to the plane of the paper is as shown in the figure.
Let 'e' be the width of each slit and'd' the width of each opaque space.
Then (e+d) is known as grating element and XY is the screen.
Suppose a parallel beam of monochromatic light of wavelength ' ' be incident normally on the grating.
By Huygen's principle, each of the slit sends secondary wavelets in all directions.
Now, the secondary wavelets travelling in the direction of incident light will focus at a point Po on the screen.
This point Po will be a central maximum.
Now consider the secondary waves travelling in a direction inclined at an angle '' with the incident light will reach point P1 in different phases.
As a result dark and bright bands on both sides of central maximum are obtained.
The intensity at point P1 may be considered by applying the theory of Fraunhofer diffraction at a single slit.
The wavelets proceeding from all points in a slit along their direction are equivalent to a single wave of amplitude starting from the middle point of the slit, Where If there are N slits, then we have N diffracted waves.
The path difference between two consecutive slits is Therefore, the phase difference ......(2.39) Hence the intensity in a direction can be found by finding the resultant amplitude of N vibrations each of amplitude and a phase difference of '' Since in the previous case Substituting these in equation The resultant amplitude on screen at P1 becomes ..........(2.40) Thus, Intensity at P1 will be ...(2.41) The factor gives the distribution of Intensity due to a single slit while the factor gives the distribution of intensity as a combined effect of all the slits 5.1.4 Intensity Distribution: Case (i): Principal maxima: The eqn (2.40) will take a maximum value if .......(2.42) n = 0 corresponds to zero order maximum.
For n = 1,2,3,… we obtain first, second, third,… principal maxima respectively.
The ± sign indicates that there are two principal maxima of the same order lying on either side of zero order maximum.
Case(ii): Minima Positions: The eq.
(2.40) takes minimum value if but .
..........(2.43) where m has all integral values except m = 0, N, 2N, …, nN, because for these values becomes zero and we get principal maxima.
Thus, m = 1, 2, 3, …, (N-1).
Hence where gives the minima positions which are adjacent to the principal maxima.
Case(iii): Secondary maxima: As there are (N-1) minima between two adjacent principal maxima there must be (N-2) other maxima between two principal maxima.
These are known as secondary maxima.
To find their positions Only ............(2.44) The roots of the above equation other than those for which give the positions of secondary maxima The eqn (2.44) can be written as From the triangle we have Since intensity of principal maxima is proportional to N2, Hence if the value of N is larger, then the secondary maxima will be weaker and becomes negligible when N becomes infinity.
5.1.5 Formation of Spectra with Grating The principle maxima in a grating are formed in direction given by (𝒆+ 𝒅)𝒔𝒊𝒏𝜽= 𝒏𝝀.
where (𝒆+ 𝒅) is the grating element, 'n' the order of the maxima and ' ' the wavelength of the incident light.
1) For a given wavelength ' ' the angle of diffraction' ' is different for principal maxima of different orders.
2) For white light and for a particular order n, the light of different wavelengths will be diffracted in different directions.
The longer the wavelength, greater is the angle of diffraction.
So in each order, we will get the spectra having as many lines as the wavelength in the light source.
At centre (n = 0, zero order) gives the maxima of all wavelengths.
So here different wavelengths coincide to form the central image of the same color as that the light source.
Similarly, the principal maxima of all wavelengths corresponding to n = 1 will form the first order spectrum, the principal maxima of all wavelengths corresponding to n = 2, will form the second order spectrum and so on.
Important characteristics of grating spectra: ✓ Spectra of different orders are situated symmetrically on both sides of zero order.
✓ Spectral lines are almost straight and quite sharp.
✓ Spectral colors are in the order from Violet to Red.
✓ Spectral lines are more dispersed as we go to higher orders.
✓ Most of the incident intensity goes to zero order and rest is distributed among the other orders.
5.1.6 Maximum number of orders formed by a Grating: The principal maxima in a grating satisfy the condition Or The maximum angle of diffraction is 90o, hence the maximum possible order is given by Ex: Consider a grating having grating element which is less than twice the wavelength of the incident light, then i.e., only the first order is possible.
5.1.7 Absent spectrum with a diffraction grating: We know the intensity maxima at a point due to grating can be observed when that satisfies the maxima for single slit s well as for 'N' no.
of slits.
But when the condition for principal maxima due to 'N' no.
of slits and the condition for minima due to single slit are satisfied simultaneously for the same angle θ, then the principal maxima due to grating for that particular order will be missed or absent, which is called missing spectra.
We know that, in case of a grating the principal maxima are obtained in the directions given by 𝑛= 0,1,2,3,4 … … Also, in case of a single slit, the minima are obtained in the directions given by 𝑚= 1,2,3,4 … … ..
If both the conditions are satisfied simultaneously for same angle 'θ', a particular maximum of order n will be missing in the grating spectrum.
Dividing above equations we have which is the condition of absent spectra.
If the width of the ruling is equal to the width of the slit, the second order spectrum will be missed.
5.1.8 Dispersive power of grating Dispersive power of grating is defined as the ratio of the difference in the angle of diffraction of any two neighboring spectral lines to the difference in the wavelength between the two spectral lines.
It can also be defined as the difference in the angle of diffraction per unit change in wave length.
The diffraction grating of the nth order principal maxima for wavelength given by equation (𝑒+ 𝑑)𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃= 𝑛𝜆 Differentiating this equation, we have , (𝑒+ 𝑑)𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃 𝑑𝜃= 𝑛 𝑑𝜆 (e+d) is constant and 'n' is constant for given order.
So, 𝑑𝜃 𝑑𝜆 is the dispersive power of grating 𝑑𝜃 𝑑𝜆= 𝑛 (𝑒+𝑑)𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃 So dispersive power of grating 𝑑𝜃 𝑑𝜆 α n (order of spectrum) α 1 (𝑒+𝑑) α 1 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃 5.1.9 Determination of Wavelength Using Grating In laboratory, the grating spectrum can be obtained by using a spectrometer.
Adjustments: Before performing the experiment, the following adjustments are made.
(1) The spectrometer is adjusted for parallel rays by Schuster's method.
(2) The grating is adjusted for normal incidence.
Measurement of : When a white light is incident on the grating normally, the beam gets dispersed and in each order of the spectrum we can observe constituent wavelengths ( i.e., VIBGYOR) 1) The telescope is now turned to get the first order spectrum in the field of view on left.
2) The cross-wire is adjusted on the line whose wavelength is to be determined (say on RED line) 3) Now, the readings of the two verniers are noted.
4) The telescope is then turned to the right side to receive the first order spectrum and repeat steps (2) & (3).
5) The difference between readings of the same vernier gives twice the angle of diffraction θ for that line in first order.
6) By substituting the values of 'θ', (𝑒+ 𝑑) and n in we can determine the wavelength of light.
The same procedure from step (1) through (6) is repeated for second order and even in higher orders.
Numerical: 1.
In Fraunhoffer diffraction due to a narrow slit, a screen is placed 2 meters away from the lens to obtain the pattern.
If the slit width is 0.2 mm and the first minima lie 5 mm on either side of the central maximum, find the wavelength of light.
Sol: In the Fraunhoffer diffraction due to a single slit of width e, the direction of minima are given by e sin θ = ±m λ For first minima on either side of central maximum, m =1.
Also, when θ is very small sin θ = θ.
Hence, e θ = λ or, θ = λ/e = λ/0.02 θ is also given by 0.5/200 So, λ/0.02 = 0.5/200 or, λ = 5000 Å 2.
A parallel beam of light is normally incident on a plane transmission grating having 4250 lines per cm and a second order spectral line is observed at an angle of 300.
Calculate the wavelength of light.
Sol: We know that (e +d) sinθ = nλ, n is an integer Here, (e +d) is the grating element, n is the order of the spectrum There are 4250 lines per cm.
therefore (e +d) = 1 4250 cm Also, n =2, θ = 300 So, λ = (e +d) sinθ 𝑛 = 5882 Å 3.
In a grating spectrum, which spectral line in 4th order will overlap with 3rd order line of 5600 Å?
Sol: The grating equation is (e +d) sinθ = nλ If nth order of λ1 coincides with (n+1)th order of λ2, then (e +d) sinθ = nλ1 = (n+1) λ2 or, λ2 = nλ1 𝑛+1 = 3×5600 4 = 4200 Å 4.
What is the highest order spectrum which may be seen with light of wavelength 5000 Å by means of a grating with 3000 lines/cm?
Sol: The grating equation is (e +d) sinθ = nλ The maximum value of sinθ is 1.
Therefore, the highest order visible with grating spectrum is given by nmax = 𝑒+𝑑 λ = 1 3000×5 ×10−5 =6.6 So, the highest order, which may be seen, is 6.
5.
A plane transmission grating having 5000 lines per cm is being used under normal incidence of light.
If the width of opaque parts be double than that of the transparent parts of the grating, then which orders of spectra will be absent?
Sol: The condition for absent spectra is 𝑒+𝑑 e = 𝑛 𝑚 where m = 1,2,3……………… If d = 2e, then n = 3m = 3, 6, 9, …………… Hence the 3rd, 6th, 9th ………..order spectra would be absent.
6.
For a grating with grating element 18000 Å, obtain the dispersions in the first order spectrum around wavelength 5000 Å, assuming normal incidence.
Sol: The expression for angular dispersion is given by 𝑑𝜃 dλ = 𝑛 (𝑒+𝑑)𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃 = 1 √(𝑒+𝑑 𝑛) 2 −λ2 (𝑒+ 𝑑)= 18000 Å, λ = 5000 Å, n=1 Substituting, we get 𝑑𝜃 dλ = 5.78 × 10-5 rad/ Å.
7.
In a plane transmission grating, the angle of diffraction for the second order principal maxima for wavelength 5000 Å is 300.
Calculate the number of lines in one cm of the grating surface.
8.
A plane transmission grating produces an angular separation of 0.01 radian between two wavelengths observed at an angle of 300.
If the mean value of the wavelength is 5000 Å and the spectrum is observed in the second order, calculate the difference in the two wavelengths.
Questions: Short & medium answer type 1.
Distinguish between Fresnel's and Frounhofer's diffraction.
2.
Distinguish between diffraction and interference.
3.
Diffraction can occur if slit width is greater than wavelength of light.
Justify.
4.
Find the approximate expression for the secondary maxima in case of Fraunhofer's single slit diffraction pattern.
5.
Explain the meaning of missing spectra in the diffraction pattern of a plane transmission grating.
Obtain the expression for missing spectra.
6.
In a plane diffraction grating, if the width of opaque space is equal to the slit width, find the orders of missing spectra.
7.
Define dispersive power of grating.
Write the factors on which it depends.
8.
A glass piece and a student grating both are identical in size and shape is given to you.
How can you distinguish the students grating from the glass piece without using any optical instrument?
9.
Find the position of maxima, minima and secondary maxima in a single slit diffraction pattern.
10.
Draw the intensity distribution curve in case of a single slit diffraction.
11.
Why the secondary maxima are not visible in case of grating?
12.
Write the characteristics of grating spectra.
Long answer type 1.
Derive an expression for intensity incase of Fraunhofer's single slit diffraction with a neat diagram.
2.
In Fraunhofer's diffraction due to single slit, obtain the conditions for principal maximum, secondary maxima and minima.
Find its expression, and then show it graphically.
3.
How grating spectra are formed?
Write its important characteristics.
Explain the meaning of missing spectra in the diffraction pattern of a plane transmission grating.
Obtain the expression for missing spectra.
4.
Define dispersive power of grating.
Obtain the expression for it Write the factors on which it depends.
Show that the dispersive power of a grating is 𝑛 {(𝑎+ 𝑏)2 −𝑛2𝜆2} 1 2 ⁄ Where (𝑎+ 𝑏) is the grating element and ′𝑛' is the order of the spectrum.
: ELECTROMAGNETISM Scalar and Vector Function: A scalar function f(x, y, z) specifies a magnitude but independent of directions.
A vector function F(x, y, z) specifies a magnitude and a direction at every point (x, y, z) in some region of space.
We can picture a vector function as a collection of arrows (Fig.
1), one for each point (x, y, z).
Fig.
1: Vector function The direction of the arrow at any point is the direction specified by the vector function, and its length is proportional to the magnitude of the function.
A vector function, like any vector, can be resolved into components as in fig.
2.
Fig.
2: Vector function components Letting, i, j and k unit vectors along the x-, y-, and z-axes, respectively, we write 𝐹⃗ (x, y, z) = 𝑖̂𝐹𝑥+𝑗̂𝐹𝑦+𝑘̂𝐹𝑧 (1) Fx, Fy and Fz are themselves scalar functions of x, y and z.
The magnitude or the direction (or both) of the vector quantities may change with position and time.
The various laws of electromagnetism describe how the different scalar and the vector functions change with position and time.
The laws are expressed mathematically in terms of derivatives of the fields with respect to space coordinates and time.
The derivatives w.r.t.
space coordinates are expressed in terms of gradient, divergence and curl operators.
Gradient(𝛁⃗⃗): Suppose, we have a function of three variables-say, the temperature T (x, y,z) in this room.
(Start out in one corner, and set up a system of axes; then for each point (x, y,z) in the room, T gives the temperature at that spot.)
We want to generalize the notion of "derivative" to functions like T , which depend not on one but on three variables.
A derivative is supposed to tell us how fast the function varies, if we move a little distance.
But this time the situation is more complicated, because it depends on what direction we move.
In fact, the question "how fast does T vary?"
Taking the total derivatives on the temperature (T), we have; 𝑑𝑇= 𝜕𝑇 𝜕𝑥𝑑𝑥+ 𝜕𝑇 𝜕𝑦𝑑𝑦+ 𝜕𝑇 𝜕𝑧𝑑𝑧 (2) This tells us how T changes when we alter all three variables by the infinitesimal amounts dx, dy, dz.
Interestingly, the eq.
(2) is a reminiscent of the dot product i.e., 𝑑𝑇= (𝑖̂ 𝜕𝑇 𝜕𝑥+ 𝑗̂ 𝜕𝑇 𝜕𝑦+ 𝑘̂ 𝜕𝑇 𝜕𝑧) ∙(𝑖̂𝑑𝑥+ 𝑗̂𝑑𝑦+ 𝑘̂𝑑𝑧) (3) 𝑑𝑇= (∇𝑇) ∙(𝑑𝑟) where 𝛁𝑇≡ 𝑖̂ 𝜕𝑇 𝜕𝑥+ 𝑗̂ 𝜕𝑇 𝜕𝑦+ 𝑘̂ 𝜕𝑇 𝜕𝑧 (4) is the gradient of T. Note that ∇⃗⃗𝑇 is the generalized derivative and is a vector quantity i.e., like any vector, the gradient has magnitude and direction.
To determine its geometrical meaning, we can rewrite the total derivative as; 𝑑𝑇= (∇𝑇) ∙(𝑑𝑟) = |𝑑𝑇||𝑑𝑟| cos𝜃 (5) If we fix the magnitude |dr| and search around in various directions (that is, vary θ), the maximum change in T evidentally occurs when θ = 0.
That is, for a fixed distance |dr|, dT is greatest when I move in the same direction as ∇⃗⃗𝑇.
Thus, The gradient points in the direction of maximum increase of the scalar function (f say).
In other words, ∇⃗⃗𝑓is normal to the surface of constant f. The Del (𝛁) Operator: The gradient has the formal appearance of a vector, ∇⃗⃗, operates a scalar function as seen from the eq (4).
Generally, we can represent the del operator in vector notation as; ∇⃗⃗= 𝑖̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑥+ 𝑗̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑦+ 𝑘̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑧 (6) It is also known as the nabla operator.
Operation with the Del/Nabla operator: Just like vector operations, Del operates with scalar and vector functions in three different ways.
These are The Divergence (∇⃗⃗.
): From the definition of ∇⃗⃗ we construct the divergence: ∇⃗⃗.
𝑓⃗= (𝑖̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑥+ 𝑗̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑦+ 𝑘̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑧) .
(𝑖̂𝑓𝑥+ 𝑗̂𝑓𝑦+ 𝑘̂𝑓𝑧) = ( 𝜕𝑓𝑥 𝜕𝑥+ 𝜕𝑓𝑦 𝜕𝑦+ 𝜕𝑓𝑧 𝜕𝑧) (7) Where fx, fy and fz are the components of the vector function f. The divergence operates on a vector function f yields a scalar quantity.
The divergence of a vector function (F) is, like any dot product of a vector.
Geometrical Interpretation: The name divergence is well chosen, for ∇⃗⃗∙f⃗ is a measure of how much the vector f spreads out (diverges) from the point in question.
For example, the vector function in Fig.
3 has a large (positive) divergence (if the arrows pointed in, it would be a negative divergence).
Fig.
3: positive divergence Here, 𝑖̂, 𝑗̂ and 𝑘̂ are replaced by 𝑥̂, 𝑦̂ and 𝑧̂ respectively.
Solenoidal Field: If divergence of a vector field/function (say 𝑓⃗) vanishes (∇⃗⃗.
𝑓⃗= 0) then the field is known as a solenoidal field.
The Curl (𝛁⃗⃗×): From the definition of ∇ we construct the curl of a function as; Example 2.
∇⃗⃗× 𝐹⃗= (𝑖̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑥+ 𝑗̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑦+ 𝑘̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑧) × (𝑖̂𝐹𝑥+ 𝑗̂𝐹𝑦+ 𝑘̂𝐹𝑧) ∇⃗⃗× 𝐹⃗ = 𝑖̂ ( 𝜕𝐹𝑦 𝜕𝑧− 𝜕𝐹𝑧 𝜕𝑦) + 𝑗̂ ( 𝜕𝐹𝑥 𝜕𝑧− 𝜕𝐹𝑧 𝜕𝑥) + 𝑘̂ ( 𝜕𝐹𝑦 𝜕𝑥− 𝜕𝐹𝑥 𝜕𝑧) (8) Notice that the curl of a vector function (F) is, like any cross product of a vector.
Geometrical Interpretation: The name curl is also well chosen, for 𝛻⃗⃗× 𝐹⃗ is a measure of how much the vector F swirls around the point.
Example: Irrotational Field: The (vector) field (F say) is said to be irrottaional if curl of the field vanishes i.e., ∇⃗⃗× 𝐹⃗= 0 Operations using the Del: (vii) Divergence of gradient of a scalar function (say T): i.e., ∇ · (∇T ) = ∇2T = 𝜕2𝑇 𝜕𝑥2 + 𝜕2𝑇 𝜕𝑦2 + 𝜕2𝑇 𝜕𝑧2 = Laplacian of T (viii) Curl of gradient of a scalar function (say T) is always zero i.e., ∇ × (∇T) = 0 (ix) Gradient of divergence '∇(∇ · v)' seldom occurs in physical applications, and it has not been given any special name of its own.
(x) The divergence of a curl, like the curl of a gradient, is always zero: ∇ · (∇ × v) = 0 (xi) Curl of curl: ∇ × (∇ × v) = ∇(∇ · v) − ∇2 v (For readers perspective 𝛻⃗⃗ is here replaced by ∇ in the above formulas) Integrals: Line, Surface and the Volume Integrals: In electrodynamics, we encounter several different kinds of integrals, among which the most important are line (or path) integrals, surface integrals (or flux), and volume integrals.
a.
Line Integrals of a vector field: A line integral is an expression of the form (9) where v is a vector function, dl is the infinitesimal displacement vector, and the integral is to be carried out along a prescribed path, from point a to point b as shown in the fig.
4.
Fig.
4: Line integral between two points a and b.
If the path in question forms a closed loop (that is, if b = a), we shall put a circle on the integral sign then, the line integral becomes; (10) Ordinarily, the value of a line integral depends critically on the path taken from a to b, but there is an important special class of vector functions for which the line integral is independent of path and is determined entirely by the end points.
In this case, the vector field is known as a conservative field.
b.
Surface Integrals: A surface integral is an expression of the form (11) where v is again some vector function, and the integral is over a specified surface (see Fig.
5).
Fig.
5: surface integral Here da is an infinitesimal patch of area, with direction perpendicular to the surface.
For a closed surface, the surface integral can be written as; If v describes the flow of a fluid (mass per unit area per unit time), then represents the total mass per unit time passing through the surface- hence the alternative name, 'flux'.
c. Volume Integrals: A volume integral is an expression of the form (12) where T is a scalar function and dτ is an infinitesimal volume element.
In Cartesian coordinates, dτ = dx dy dz For example, if T is the density of a substance (which may vary from point to point), then the volume integral would give the total mass.
Theorems: Gauss Divergence Theorem: The volume integral of divergence of a vector field (say V) over a given volume is equal to the surface integral of the vector over a closed surface (a) enclosing the volume.
Mathematically, (13) Stoke's Theorem: The surface integral of the curl of a vector field over a given region (say S) is equal to the line integral of the vector along the boundary of the area (P).
(14) Maxwell's Equations: The various laws of electromagnetism were pulled together and were cast into four equations involving time and space derivatives of electric and magnetic fields.
These equations are known as Maxwell's electromagnetic equations.
The equations are as follows; 1).
Gauss' Law in Electrostatics: Statement: The total electric flux 'ɸE' over a closed surface is equal to 1/ϵ0 times the net charge enclosed by the surface.
We have, the electric flux (ɸE) associated with the charge (as seen from the fig.6) enclosed by a surface's' is given by ɸE = 𝑞𝑒𝑛𝑐 𝜖0 (15) Fig.6: Flux emanating from the elementary surface 'ds'.
Here, qenc = +q where ϵ0 is permittivity of the free space.
Also, the electric flux is defined as the surface integral of the electric field i.e., ɸE = 𝐸⃗⃗.
𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ (16) Equating both the equations, finally the Gauss' law can be expressed mathematically as; ɸE = 𝐸⃗⃗.
𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = 𝑞𝑒𝑛𝑐 𝜖0 (17) Notes: The charge enclosed (qenc ) by the surface may be point charges or continuously distributed charges.
The net enclosed charges may be positive, negative or zero.
Accordingly, the net electric flux may be outward, inward or zero.
The surface enclosing the charges is termed as a Gaussian surface.
The electric flux doesn't depend on the shape or size of the Gaussian surface as long as the charges are enclosed by the surface.
Symmetry is crucial w.r.t.
application of the Gauss' law.
The eq.
(17) is known as the integral form of the Gauss' law 1.1: Gauss' Law in terms of Electric Displacement (D): We have the electric displacement vector (D) in vaccum/free space is defined as; 𝐷⃗⃗ = 𝜖0𝐸⃗⃗ Putting this value in the equation (17), we get ɸE = 𝐷⃗⃗.
𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = 𝑞𝑒𝑛𝑐 (18) 1.2: Gauss' Law in differential form: Let, ρ is the volume charge distributions (dq/dV).
The net enclosed charge by the Gaussian surface will be, qenc = ρ dV (19) where dV is the elementary volume encloses by the Gaussian surface.
Putting the equation (19) in eq (17), we get; 𝐸⃗⃗.
𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = ( ρ dV)/ ϵ0 (20) Applying the Gauss' divergence theorem to the left hand side of eq.
(20), we have 𝐸⃗⃗.
𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = (∇⃗⃗.𝐸⃗⃗)𝑑𝑉 (21) Equating eq.
(21) and (22), we get (∇⃗⃗.𝐸⃗⃗)𝑑𝑉 = 1 𝜖0 ρ dV Or (∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗− 𝜌 𝜖0)dV =0 The integrand must vanish, leading to ∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗= 𝜌 𝜖0 (22) This is the differential form of the Gauss' law.
In terms of Displacement Vector, eq.
(22) can be written as; ∇⃗⃗.
𝐷⃗⃗= 𝜌 (23) 2.
Gauss' law in Magnetostatics: Statement: The magnetic flux (ɸB ) over a closed surface enclosing the volume is always zero.
Mathematically, ɸB = 𝐵⃗⃗.𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = 0 (24) where B, is the magnetic flux density (magnetic flux per unit area) with unit is Weber/m 2.
Since the magnetic poles always occur in pairs, isolated magnetic poles don't exist.
Therefore, within any macroscopic volume, the net magnetic pole is always zero.
Applying the Gauss' divergence theorem to the equation (24), we have ɸB = 𝐵⃗⃗.𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = (∇⃗⃗.𝐵⃗⃗)𝑑𝑉 = 0 or (∇⃗⃗.𝐵⃗⃗) = 0 (25) Equation (25) describes the differential form of the Gauss' law in Magnetostatics.
In other words, it shows that non-existence of magnetic monopoles.
3.
Faraday's Law of Electromagnetic Induction: In 1831 Michael Faraday reported that A changing magnetic field induces an electric field or simply an emf 'ε'.
The magnitude of the emf induced in the loop is equal to the negative rate of change of magnetic flux through the surface enclosed by the loop.
Mathematically, 𝜀= − 𝑑ɸ𝐵 𝑑𝑡 (28) The emf (ε) is defined as the line integral of the electric field i.e., ε = ∮𝐸⃗⃗ .𝑑𝑙 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ (29) Equating eq.
(28) and (29) respectively, ∮𝐸⃗⃗ .𝑑𝑙 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ = − 𝑑ɸ𝐵 𝑑𝑡 or ∮𝐸⃗⃗ .𝑑𝑙 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ = − 𝑑∮𝐵⃗⃗ .𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝑑𝑡 (ɸB = 𝐵⃗⃗.
𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗) This is known as the Faraday's law of Electromagnetic Induction.
3.1: Differential form of the Faraday's Law: Applying Stoke's theorm to the lhs and equating both side, we get (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗).𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = − 𝑑∮𝐵⃗⃗ .𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝑑𝑡 or, (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) = − 𝑑𝐵⃗⃗ 𝑑𝑡 (30) The eq.
(30) is known as the diferential form of the Faraday's Law of Electromagnetic Induction.
4.
Ampere's Circuital Law: Statement: The line integral of magnetic field along a closed loop (C) is equal to μ0 times the net electric current enclosed by the loop.
(26) Here I = Ienc= algebraic sum of the currents enclosed by the loop C (Amperian loop).
Let us considered an Amperian loop, which encloses the current I1, I2 respectively as shown in fig.7.
The Ampere's circuital law becomes C C C Fig.
7: Amper's loop carrying current in two straight wires.
∮𝐵⃗⃗ .𝑑𝑙 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ = 𝜇0(𝐼1 + 𝐼2) Alternatively says, the integral of magnetic field intensity (H) along an imaginary closed path is equal to the current enclosed by the path.
Example: Use Ampere's circuital law, find the magnitude of the magnetic field B, at a point due to a straight, infinitely long conductor carrying a steady current.
Solution: Let us consider an infinitesimal length dl of the Amperian loop at the same point.
At each point on the Amperian loop, the value of B is constant since the perpendicular distance of that point from the axis of conductor is fixed, but the direction will be along the tangent on the loop at that point.
Now, according to Ampere's Circuital Law (B, dl are in the same direction) C Therefore, or B = μ0I/2πr (here, B indicates a vector quantity) 4.1 Ampere's Law in Differential Form: We have, From the current distribution, I = 𝐽 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗.𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ where J = current density (current per unit area).
𝐵⃗⃗.𝑑𝑙 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ =μ0 𝐽 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗.𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ Applying the Stoke's theorm to the lhs, (∇⃗⃗× 𝐵⃗⃗).
𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = μ0 𝐽 ⃗⃗⃗⃗.
𝑑𝑠 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ Equating both sides, we have (∇⃗⃗× 𝐵⃗⃗) = μ0 𝐽⃗⃗ (27) The eq.
(27) is known as the diferential form of the Ampere's Circuital Law.
5.0: Maxwell's Equations: 5.1: Electrodynamics before Maxwell So far, we have encountered the following laws, specifying the divergence and curl of electric and magnetic fields: These equations represent the state of electromagnetic theory, when Maxwell began his work.
5.2: Maxwell's Correction to the Ampere's Law: Just as a changing magnetic field induces an electric field (Faraday' law), Maxwell proposed that 'a changing electric field induces a magnetic field'.
The real confirmation of Maxwell's theory came in 1888 with Hertz's experiments on electromagnetic waves.
Maxwell called his extra term the displacement current (Id): 𝐼𝑑= 𝜖0𝐴 𝑑𝐸⃗ 𝑑𝑡 (28) The displacement current exists as long as the electric field changes with time.
When the electric field attains a constant value (just like the plates of the capacitor gets fully charged), displacement current vanishes and the filed is established by the conduction current (I = due to flow of charge particles).
Maxwell introduced this displacement current in the Amper's Circuital Law for a time varying electric field and modified the equation as; ∮𝐵⃗⃗.𝑑𝑙 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ = 𝜇0 (𝐼+ 𝐼𝑑) (29) This is known as the Modified Amper's Circuital Law with Maxwell's correction.
The corresponding differentional form will be, (∇⃗⃗× 𝐵⃗⃗) = μ0 (𝐽⃗+ 𝐽𝑑 ⃗⃗⃗⃗) (30) Where, 𝐽𝑑 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ is known as the displacement current density (Id/A).
or, (∇⃗⃗× 𝐵⃗⃗) = μ0 (𝐽⃗+ 𝜖0 𝑑𝐸⃗ 𝑑𝑡) (31) 5.3: Distinction between the displacement and the conduction currents.
Displacement Current Conduction Current The displacement current evolves due to time varying electric field.
The Conduction current originates from the flow of charges in a conducting medium or in a metal.
It is a ficticious current which can exist in vaccum or in any medium.
It is a real current.
It depends on the electric permitivity of the medium and the rate at which the electric field changes with time.
It obeys the Ohm's Law and depends on the resistance and potential difference of the conductor.
Now, the finishing touches on Maxwell's equations are: (32) This is known as the differential form of Maxwell's Equations.
The final differential and Integral form of the Maxwell's equations can be qritten as; Gauss' Law for Electrostatic s Gauss' Law for Magnetism Faraday's Law of Induction Ampere's Law Electric flux through a closed surface is proportional to the charged enclosed No magnetic monopole; The total magnetic flux through a closed surface is zero Changing magnetic flux gives emf.
Electric current and changing electric flux produces a magnetic field For a charge and current free medium (free space), the Maxwell's equations become; (33) Corresponding the Integral forms are; (34) 5.4: Physical Significance of Maxwell's Equations: Maxwell's equations incorporate all the laws of electromagnetism, which were developed from experimental observations and were expressed in the form of various emprical laws.
Maxwell's equations lead to the existence of electromagnetic waves, which has been amply confirmed by experimental observations.
These equations are consistence with all the observed properties of e.m. waves.
Maxwell's equations are consistence with the special theory of relativity.
Maxwell's equations are used to describe the classical electromagnetic field as well as the quatum theory of interaction of charged particles with electromagnetic field.
Maxwell's equations provided a unified description of the electric and magnetic phenomena which were treated independely.
0 =  dA E 0 =  dA B dt d dl E B  − =  dt d dl B E  =  0 0  Electromagnetic Waves 6: Maxwell's Equations in Free space/vacuum: In free space, the charge density 𝜌 and the current density 𝐽⃗ are zero.
So the four Maxwell's equations in free space are (i) ∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗ = 0 (ii) ∇⃗⃗.
𝐵⃗⃗ = ∇⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗ = 0 (iii) ∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗ = − 𝜕𝐵⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 (iv) ∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗ = 𝜕𝐷⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 (with 𝜌 and σ are zero, 𝐽⃗ = σ𝐸⃗⃗ = 0, 𝐷⃗⃗ = ε0𝐸⃗⃗, and 𝐵⃗⃗ = 𝜇0𝐻⃗⃗) 6.1: Electromagnetic Wave Equations in terms of 𝐸⃗⃗ From Maxwell's 3rd equation ∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗ = − 𝜕𝐵⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 Taking curl on both the sides, we can write ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) = − 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 (∇⃗⃗× 𝐵⃗⃗) = −µ0 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 (∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗) Applying Maxwell's 4th equation to the right hand side of the above equation we get; Or, ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) = −ε0µ0 𝜕2𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 …………….
(1) But, ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) = ∇⃗⃗(∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗) - ∇2𝐸⃗⃗ Now, equation (1) can be written as ∇⃗⃗(∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗) - ∇2𝐸⃗⃗ = −ε0µ0 𝜕2𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 ……………………..(2) From, Maxwell's 1st equation, ∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗ = 0 Equation (2) can be written as - ∇2𝐸⃗⃗ = −ε0µ0 𝜕2𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 Or, 𝛁𝟐𝑬⃗⃗ = ε0µ0 𝝏𝟐𝑬⃗⃗ 𝝏𝒕𝟐……………………………..(3) Equation (3) is the required electromagnetic wave equation in free space, in terms of electric vector, 𝐸⃗⃗ (2nd order differential wave equation).
6.2 Electromagnetic Wave Equations in terms of 𝐻⃗⃗ We have Maxwell's 4th equation ∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗ = − 𝜕𝐷⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 Taking curl on both the sides, we can write ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗) = − 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 (∇⃗⃗× 𝐷⃗⃗) = −ε0 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗) = −ε0µ0 𝜕2𝐻⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 ……………………………(4) (Applying Maxwell's 3rd equation) Or, ∇⃗⃗(∇⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗) - ∇2𝐻⃗⃗ = −ε0µ0 𝜕2𝐻⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 Or, - ∇2𝐻⃗⃗ = −ε0µ0 𝜕2𝐻⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 (Applying Maxwell's 2nd equation) Or, 𝛁𝟐𝑯⃗⃗⃗ = ε0µ0 𝝏𝟐𝑯⃗⃗⃗ 𝝏𝒕𝟐 ……………………………(5) Equation (5) is the required electromagnetic wave equation in free space, in terms of magnetic vector, 𝐻⃗⃗ (2nd order differential wave equation).
6.3 Velocity of electromagnetic wave The general wave equation (2nd order differential wave equation) is ∇2𝛹⃗⃗⃗ = 1 𝑣2 𝜕2𝛹 ⃗⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 Comparing this equation with e.m. wave equation (equation 3 or 5), we can write the expression for velocity, 𝑣 Hence, 𝑣 = 1 √µ0ε0 ≅2.99 × 108 m/s ≅𝑐 (velocity of light) 7.0 Maxwell's equations in a dielectric medium: Maxwell's equations in a dielectric medium are (i) ∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗ = 0 (ii) ∇⃗⃗.
𝐵⃗⃗ = ∇⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗ = 0 (iii) ∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗ = − 𝜕𝐵⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 (iv) ∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗ = 𝜕𝐷⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 (with 𝜌 and 𝐽⃗ are zero, 𝐷⃗⃗ = ε𝐸⃗⃗, and 𝐵⃗⃗ = µ𝐻⃗⃗) 7.1 Electromagnetic Wave Equations in terms of 𝐸⃗⃗: From Maxwell's 3rd equation ∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗ = − 𝜕𝐵⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 Taking curl on both the sides, we can write ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) = − 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 (∇⃗⃗× 𝐵⃗⃗) = −µ 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 (∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗) Or, ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) = −εµ 𝜕2𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 …………….
(6) (Applying Maxwell's 4th equation) But, ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) = ∇⃗⃗(∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗) - ∇2𝐸⃗⃗ Now, equation (1) can be written as ∇⃗⃗(∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗) - ∇2𝐸⃗⃗ = −εµ 𝜕2𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 …………………… (7) From, Maxwell's 1st equation, ∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗ = 0 Equation (2) can be written as - ∇2𝐸⃗⃗ = −εµ 𝜕2𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 Or, 𝛁𝟐𝑬⃗⃗ = εµ 𝝏𝟐𝑬⃗⃗ 𝝏𝒕𝟐…………………………….. (8) Equation (8) is the required electromagnetic wave equation in a dielectric medium, in terms of electric vector, 𝐸⃗⃗ (2nd order differential wave equation).
Similarly, we can derive for magnetic component 𝐻⃗⃗ and is represented by 𝛁𝟐𝑯⃗⃗⃗ = εµ 𝝏𝟐𝑯⃗⃗⃗ 𝝏𝒕𝟐……………………………… (9) 7.2 Velocity of electromagnetic wave: The general wave equation (2nd order differential wave equation) is ∇2𝛹⃗⃗⃗ = 1 𝑣2 𝜕2𝛹 ⃗⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 Comparing this equation with em wave equation (equation 8 or 9), we can write the expression for velocity, 𝑣 𝑣 = 1 √εµ = 1 √ε0εrμ0μr = 𝑐 √εrμr If μr =1 (non-magnetic medium), then 𝒗 = 𝒄 √𝛆𝐫 = 𝒄 𝒏 n is refractive index of the medium So, 𝑛 = √𝛆𝐫 = √𝑘 (k is dielectric constant of the medium) 8.0 Transverse nature of electromagnetic wave: Suppose the em wave is propagating in any arbitrary direction defined by the propagation vector k. The electric and magnetic vectors are represented by the equations 𝐸⃗⃗ (𝑟, 𝑡) = 𝐸⃗⃗0 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) 𝐻⃗⃗ (𝑟, 𝑡) = 𝐻⃗⃗0 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) Here, the vectors E0 and H0 are constant in time, k is propagation vector whose magnitude is equal to 2𝜋 𝜆 and its direction is the direction of propagation of wave and 𝑖 = √−1.
8.1 Transverse nature of 𝐸⃗⃗ From Maxwell's 1st equation (in free space) ∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗ = 0 or, ∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗0 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) = 0 or, [𝑖̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑥+ 𝑗̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑦+ 𝑘̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑧].
[𝑖̂𝐸0𝑥 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) + 𝑗̂𝐸0𝑦 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) + 𝑘̂𝐸0𝑧 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)] = 0 or, 𝑖𝐸0𝑥 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑥 + 𝑖𝐸0𝑦 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑦 + 𝑖𝐸0𝑧 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑧 = 0 or, 𝑖(𝐸𝑥𝑘𝑥+ 𝐸𝑦𝑘𝑦+ 𝐸𝑧𝑘𝑧) =0 or, 𝐸⃗⃗.
𝑘⃗⃗ = 0 Two vectors are perpendicular to each other.
That means the electric vector 𝐸⃗⃗ is perpendicular to the direction of propagation.
8.2 Transverse nature of 𝐻⃗⃗ From Maxwell's 2nd equation ∇⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗ = 0 or, or, ∇⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗0 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) = 0 or, [𝑖̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑥+ 𝑗̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑦+ 𝑘̂ 𝜕 𝜕𝑧].
[𝑖̂𝐻0𝑥 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) + 𝑗̂𝐻0𝑦 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) + 𝑘̂𝐻0𝑧 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)] = 0 or, 𝑖𝐻0𝑥 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑥 + 𝑖𝐻0𝑦 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑦 + 𝑖𝐻0𝑧 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑧 =0 or, 𝑖(𝐻𝑥𝑘𝑥+ 𝐻𝑦𝑘𝑦+ 𝐻𝑧𝑘𝑧) = 0 or, 𝐻⃗⃗.𝑘⃗⃗ = 0 Two vectors are perpendicular to each other.
That means the magnetic vector 𝐻⃗⃗ is perpendicular to the direction of propagation.
8.3 Relative orientation of vector 𝑬⃗⃗ and 𝑯⃗⃗⃗ From Maxwell's 3 rd equation, ∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗ = − 𝜕𝐵⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 = −µ 𝜕𝐻⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 or, 𝑖̂ ( 𝜕𝐸𝑧 𝜕𝑦− 𝜕𝐸𝑦 𝜕𝑧) + 𝑗̂ ( 𝜕𝐸𝑥 𝜕𝑧− 𝜕𝐸𝑧 𝜕𝑥) + 𝑘̂ ( 𝜕𝐸𝑦 𝜕𝑥− 𝜕𝐸𝑥 𝜕𝑦) = −µ 𝜕𝐻⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 or, 𝑖̂ [𝑖𝐸0𝑧 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑦−𝑖𝐸0𝑦 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑧 ]+ 𝑗̂ [𝑖𝐸0𝑥 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑧−𝑖𝐸0𝑧 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑥 ]+ 𝑘̂ [𝑖𝐸0𝑦 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑥−𝑖𝐸0𝑥 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑦 ] = −µ 𝜕𝐻⃗⃗0 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) 𝜕𝑡 or, 𝑖 [𝑖̂ (𝐸𝑧𝑘𝑦− 𝐸𝑦𝑘𝑧) + 𝑗̂(𝐸𝑥𝑘𝑧− 𝐸𝑧𝑘𝑥) + 𝑘̂ (𝐸𝑦𝑘𝑥− 𝐸𝑥𝑘𝑦)] = −µ 𝑖 (-𝑤) 𝐻⃗⃗0 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) or, 𝒌⃗⃗ × 𝑬⃗⃗ = µ𝒘𝑯⃗⃗⃗ ……………………………………….
(10) (using the relation of cross product of two vectors) The equation (10) implies that the vector 𝐻⃗⃗ is perpendicular to both the vectors 𝑘⃗⃗ and 𝐸⃗⃗.
8.4.
Similarly, from Maxwell's 4th equation in a source free medium, we have ∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗ = − 𝜕𝐷⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 or, 𝑖̂( 𝜕𝐻𝑧 𝜕𝑦− 𝜕𝐻𝑦 𝜕𝑧) + 𝑗̂ ( 𝜕𝐻𝑥 𝜕𝑧− 𝜕𝐻𝑧 𝜕𝑥) + 𝑘̂ ( 𝜕𝐻𝑦 𝜕𝑥− 𝜕𝐻𝑥 𝜕𝑦) = ε 𝜕𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡 or, 𝑖̂ [𝑖𝐻0𝑧 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑦−𝑖𝐻0𝑦 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑧 ]+ 𝑗̂ [𝑖𝐻0𝑥 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑧−𝑖𝐻0𝑧 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑥 ]+ 𝑘̂ [𝑖𝐻0𝑦 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑥−𝑖𝐻0𝑥 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟)𝑘𝑦 ] = ε 𝜕𝐸⃗0 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) 𝜕𝑡 or, 𝑖 [𝑖̂ (𝐻𝑧𝑘𝑦− 𝐻𝑦𝑘𝑧) + 𝑗̂(𝐻𝑥𝑘𝑧− 𝐻𝑧𝑘𝑥)+ 𝑘̂ (𝐻𝑦𝑘𝑥− 𝐻𝑥𝑘𝑦)] = εi (-𝑤) 𝐸⃗⃗0 𝑒𝑖(𝑤𝑡−𝑘.𝑟) or, 𝑯⃗⃗⃗ × 𝒌⃗⃗ = 𝛆𝒘𝑬⃗⃗…………………………………..(11) The equation (11) implies that the vector 𝐸⃗⃗ is perpendicular to both the vectors 𝑘⃗⃗ and 𝐻⃗⃗ From equation (10) and (11), it is clear that the electric vector𝐸⃗⃗, magnetic vector 𝐻⃗⃗ and propagation vector 𝑘⃗⃗ are mutually perpendicular to each other.
They form a right hand orthogonal set.
So, if the em wave propagates along z direction, then the electric vector, 𝐸⃗⃗ and magnetic vector, 𝐻⃗⃗ are in x or y direction.
If the electric vector is along x direction then the magnetic component is along y direction.
The propagation of em wave in z direction is shown in the figure 8.
Fig.8: Propagation of em wave in z direction.
Further, the amplitudes of 𝐸⃗⃗ and 𝐵⃗⃗ are also related.
From, equation (10), we have 𝑘⃗⃗ × 𝐸⃗⃗ = µ𝑤𝐻⃗⃗ If 𝐸⃗⃗ is along x axis then 𝐻⃗⃗ is along y axis (as the wave is propagating along z axis).
Above equation can be written as 𝑘̂𝑘 × 𝑖̂ 𝐸𝑥=𝑗̂µ𝑤𝐻𝑦 or, 𝑘𝐸𝑥 = 𝑤𝐵𝑦 or, 𝑬𝒙 𝑩𝒚 = 𝒘 𝒌 = v (velocity of the em wave) 9.0 Poynting's Theorem (The Energy Conservation Theorem): Energy may be transported through space by means of electromagnetic waves.
This energy must be conserved.
The conservation of energy in electromagnetic waves is given by Poynting's theorem.
Assume that the space is linear, isotropic, homogeneous and characterized by permeability µ, permittivityε, and conductivity σ. Maxwell's equations are (i) ∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗ = 0 (ii) ∇⃗⃗.
𝐵⃗⃗ = ∇⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗ = 0 (iii) ∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗ = − 𝜕𝐵⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 (iv) ∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗ = 𝐽 ⃗⃗+ 𝜕𝐷⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 Taking the scalar product (dot product) of 𝐻⃗⃗ to the both sides of Maxwell's 3rd equation, we have 𝐻⃗⃗.
(∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗ ) = −𝐻⃗⃗ .
𝜕𝐵⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡………………………..(12) Taking the scalar product of 𝐸⃗⃗ to the both sides of Maxwell's 4th equation, we have 𝐸⃗⃗.
(∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗) = 𝐸⃗⃗.𝐽 ⃗⃗+ 𝐸⃗⃗.
𝜕𝐷⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡…………………………….
(13) Subtracting equation (13) from equation (12), we get 𝐻⃗⃗.
(∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) −𝐸⃗⃗.
(∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗) = −𝐻⃗⃗ .
𝜕𝐵⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡−𝐸⃗⃗.𝐽 ⃗⃗−𝐸⃗⃗.
𝜕𝐷⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 or, ∇.
⃗⃗⃗⃗ (𝐸⃗⃗ × 𝐻⃗⃗) = −𝐻⃗⃗ .
𝜕(µ𝐻⃗⃗) 𝜕𝑡 − 𝐸⃗⃗.
𝜕(𝜀𝐷⃗⃗) 𝜕𝑡 − 𝐸⃗⃗.𝐽 ⃗⃗ (using the vector relation) = − 1 2 𝜕(µ𝐻⃗⃗2) 𝜕𝑡 − 1 2 𝜕(𝜀𝐸⃗2) 𝜕𝑡 −𝐸⃗⃗.𝐽 ⃗⃗ =− 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 [ 1 2 𝐵⃗⃗.𝐻⃗⃗+ 1 2 𝐷⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗] −𝐸⃗⃗.𝐽 ⃗⃗ or, − ∇.
⃗⃗⃗⃗ (𝐸⃗⃗ × 𝐻⃗⃗) = 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 [ 1 2 𝐵⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗+ 1 2 𝐷⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗] + 𝐸⃗⃗.
𝐽 ⃗⃗………………………………(14) Integrating both sides of above equation over the volume V enclosed by the surface S, we get −∮∇.
⃗⃗⃗⃗ (𝐸⃗⃗ × 𝐻⃗⃗)dv = ∮ 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 [ 1 2 𝐵⃗⃗.𝐻⃗⃗+ 1 2 𝐷⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗] 𝑑𝑣 + ∮𝐸⃗⃗.
𝐽 ⃗⃗𝑑𝑣 Applying Gauss divergence theorem to the LHS of the above expression, we get −∮(𝐸⃗⃗ × 𝐻⃗⃗).ds ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ = ∮ 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 [ 1 2 𝐵⃗⃗.𝐻⃗⃗+ 1 2 𝐷⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗] 𝑑𝑣 + ∮𝐸⃗⃗.𝐽 ⃗⃗𝑑𝑣…………………… (15) Interpretation of RHS of equation (15) (i) First term ∮ 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 [ 1 2 𝐵⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗+ 1 2 𝐷⃗⃗.𝐸⃗⃗] 𝑑𝑣 1 2 𝐵⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗= 1 2 µH2 is the magnetic energy density 1 2 𝐷⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗ = 1 2 𝜀E2 is the magnetic energy density So, 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 [ 1 2 𝐵⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗+ 1 2 𝐷⃗⃗.𝐸⃗⃗] is the time rate of increase of electromagnetic energy density in the space and∮ 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 [ 1 2 𝐵⃗⃗.𝐻⃗⃗+ 1 2 𝐷⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗] 𝑑𝑣 represents the rate of increase of electromagnetic energy enclosed in volume V. (ii) Second term ∮𝐸⃗⃗.𝐽 ⃗⃗𝑑𝑣 Let dw be the work done by the electromagnetic forces in displacing a charge q through a distance dl, then dw = 𝐹⃗.𝑑𝑙 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ = q [𝐸⃗⃗+ (𝑣⃗× 𝐵⃗⃗)].
𝑑𝑙 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ = q [𝐸⃗⃗+ (𝑣⃗× 𝐵⃗⃗)].
𝑣⃗𝑑𝑡 = q𝐸⃗⃗.
𝑣⃗𝑑𝑡 (as 𝑣⃗× 𝑣⃗ = 0) The rate at which work is done per unit volume, is given by 𝑑𝑤 𝑑𝑡 = q𝐸⃗.𝑣⃗ 𝑉 = ρ𝐸⃗⃗.
𝑣⃗ = 𝐽⃗.𝐸⃗⃗ Now, the rate at which work is done on all charges in a volume V 𝑑𝑤 𝑑𝑡 = ∮𝐸⃗⃗.
𝐽 ⃗⃗𝑑𝑣 Therefore, ∮𝐸⃗⃗.
𝐽 ⃗⃗𝑑𝑣 represents the power expended by the em field for the motion of charge carriers.
v v v v v s v v v v v Since, the RHS of equation (15) represents the sum of the time rate of increase of stored electromagnetic energy in fields and the power expended by the field for the motion of charge carriers, hence LHS must represent the power flow into the volume V through the surface S or power flow out of the volume V across the surface S. This is called Poynting's theorem.
It is the law of conservation of energy in the em field.
The vector 𝐸⃗⃗ × 𝐻⃗⃗ is called Poynting vector 𝑃 ⃗⃗⃗⃗.
It is the power density associated with the field.
The direction of Poynting vector is along the direction of wave propagation (perpendicular to both 𝐸⃗⃗ and 𝐻⃗⃗).
Dimension of 𝑷⃗⃗⃗ [𝑃] = [𝐸][𝐻] but 𝐸= 𝐹 𝑞 = [𝑀𝐿𝑇−2] [𝐴𝑇] = [𝑀𝐿𝑇−3𝐴−1] and H = [𝐼𝑑𝑙 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃] [𝑟2] = [𝐴𝐿−1] Now, [𝑃] = [𝑀𝐿𝑇−3𝐴−1][𝐴𝐿−1]= [𝑀𝑇−3]= [𝑀𝐿2𝑇−2] [𝐿2𝑇] or, [𝑃] = 𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦 𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 ×𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 = 𝑃𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 = power density So, dimension of Poynting vector is same as power density.
Q.1 Show that energy is equally shared between the electric component and the magnetic component?
Ans.
: We know that the electric energy density in vacuum is 1 2 𝜀0E2= 1 2 𝜀0(cB)2 (as 𝐸 𝐵= 𝑐) = 1 2 𝜀0(cμ0H)2 = 1 2 μ0 H2 ( as c= 1 √ε0μ0) = it is magnetic energy density (proved) Q.2 Find the average value of Poynting vector over one cycle, also called intensity.
〈𝑃〉 = 〈𝐸 𝐻〉 = 〈𝐸 𝐵 μ0〉 =〈𝐸 𝐸 𝑐μ0〉 = 1 2 E02 𝑐μ0 [as 〈𝑠𝑖𝑛2𝜃〉 = 1 2 , in one cycle] or, I = 〈𝑃〉 = 1 2 𝜀0cE0 2 Q.3 Show that the average value of Poynting vector for a plane em wave is 𝟏 𝟐 √ 𝝁𝟎 𝜺𝟎 𝑯𝟎 𝟐 〈𝑃〉 = 〈𝐸 𝐻〉 = 〈𝐵𝑐 𝐵 μ0〉 = 𝟏 𝟐 𝑐 μ0 𝑩𝟎 𝟐 = 𝟏 𝟐 1 μ0 1 √𝜺𝟎μ0 𝜇0 2 𝐻0 2 = 1 2 √ 𝜇0 𝜀0 𝐻0 2 (proved) Q.4 Show that Poynting's theorem is according to conservation of energy.
10.0 Propagation of electromagnetic wave through conducting media Consider the propagation of electromagnetic waves through conducting, linear, isotropic and homogeneous medium characterized by permeability µ, permittivity ε and conductivity σ.
Four Maxwell's equations are (i) ∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗ = 0 (ii) ∇⃗⃗.
𝐵⃗⃗ = ∇⃗⃗.
𝐻⃗⃗ = 0 (iii) ∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗ = − 𝜕𝐵⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 (iv) ∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗ = 𝐽⃗+ 𝜕𝐷⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 With 𝜌 = 0 (absence of free charges), 𝐷⃗⃗ = ε𝐸⃗⃗, 𝐵⃗⃗ = µ𝐻⃗⃗ and 𝐽⃗ = 𝜎𝐸⃗⃗ From Maxwell's 3rd equation ∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗ = − 𝜕𝐵⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 Taking curl on both the sides, we can write ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) = − 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 (∇⃗⃗× 𝐵⃗⃗) = −µ 𝜕 𝜕𝑡 (∇⃗⃗× 𝐻⃗⃗) Applying Maxwell's 4th equation Or, ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) = −εµ 𝜕2𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 −𝜇𝜎 𝜕𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡 …………….
(16) But, ∇⃗⃗× (∇⃗⃗× 𝐸⃗⃗) = ∇⃗⃗(∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗) - ∇2𝐸⃗⃗ Now, equation (16) can be written as ∇⃗⃗(∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗) - ∇2𝐸⃗⃗ = −εµ 𝜕2𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 −𝜇𝜎 𝜕𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡 ……………………..(17) From, Maxwell's 1st equation, ∇⃗⃗.
𝐸⃗⃗ = 0 Equation (17) can be written as - ∇2𝐸⃗⃗ = −εµ 𝜕2𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡2 −𝜇𝜎 𝜕𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡 or, 𝛁𝟐𝑬⃗⃗ = εµ 𝝏𝟐𝑬⃗⃗ 𝝏𝒕𝟐+ 𝝁𝝈 𝝏𝑬⃗⃗ 𝝏𝒕……………………………..(18) Equation (18) is the required electromagnetic wave equation, in a conducting medium, in terms of electric vector, 𝐸⃗⃗.
Similarly, in terms of magnetic vector, we can write 𝛁𝟐𝑯⃗⃗⃗ = εµ 𝝏𝟐𝑯⃗⃗⃗ 𝝏𝒕𝟐+ 𝝁𝝈 𝝏𝑯⃗⃗⃗ 𝝏𝒕……………………………..(19) Here, 𝜇𝜎 𝜕𝐸⃗ 𝜕𝑡 and 𝜇𝜎 𝜕𝐻⃗⃗ 𝜕𝑡 are the dissipative terms.
Let us assume that the field varies as 𝑒𝑖(𝑘.𝑟−𝑤𝑡), then the solution of equation (18) may be expressed as 𝐸⃗⃗ (𝑟, 𝑡) = 𝐸⃗⃗0 𝑒𝑖(𝑘.𝑟−𝑤𝑡) Substituting the above expression in equation (18), we get (−𝑘2 + εµω2 + i𝜇𝜎ω) 𝐸⃗⃗ = 0 or, 𝑘2 = εµω2 (1 + iσ ωε)……………………………..(20) k is complex and can be written as 𝑘= 𝛼+ 𝑖𝛽 or, 𝑘2 = 𝛼2 −𝛽2 + 2𝑖𝛼𝛽…………………………(21) Comparing equation (20) and (21), we get 𝛼2 −𝛽2 = εµω2 2𝛼𝛽= 𝜇𝜎ω Solving, we get 𝛼 = ω√𝜇𝜎 [ 1+ √1+( 𝜎 𝜇ω) 2 ] 1/2 And 𝛽 = ω√𝜇𝜎 [ −1+ √1+( 𝜎 𝜇ω) 2 ] 1/2 In terms of 𝛼 and 𝛽, 𝐸⃗⃗ can be written as 𝐸 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ (𝑟, 𝑡) = 𝐸⃗⃗0 𝑒𝑖(𝛼+𝑖𝛽)𝑛̂.𝑟−𝑖𝑤𝑡)=𝐸⃗⃗0 𝑒−𝛽𝑛̂.𝑟 𝑒𝑖(𝛼𝑛̂.𝑟−𝑤𝑡)…………………….
(22) From equation (22), it is clear that the field amplitude is spatially attenuated due to the presence of the term 𝑒−𝛽𝑛̂.𝑟 .
Here, 𝛽 is called attenuation coefficient.
For good conductor, 𝜎 𝜇ω ≫1, then 𝛼= 𝛽 = √ 𝜇ω𝜎 2 ……………………………….
(23) If 𝜎 𝜇ω ≪1, then the medium is called as dielectric.
Skin depth or Penetration depth (d) The distance, at which, amplitude of electric field of the wave, decreases to 1 𝑒 times of its initial value is called skin depth.
d = 𝟏 𝜷 = √ 𝟐 𝝁𝛚𝝈 = √ 𝟏 𝝁𝝅𝒇𝝈………………………(24) Skin depth measures, how far the wave penetrates into the conductor.
NUMERICAL 1.
A nonmagnetic medium is characterized by relative permittivity εr = 80.
Calculate the speed of electromagnetic wave in the medium and refractive index of the medium.
Sol : 𝑣 = 1 √εµ = 1 √ε0εrμ0μr = 𝑐 √εrμr For a nonmagnetic medium, μr =1, then 𝑣 = 𝑐 √εr = 3 × 108 √80 = 3.35 × 107 m/s The refractive index of the medium is given by n = √εrμr = √80 = 8.94.
2.
Calculate the value of Poynting's vector on the surface of the sun if the power radiated by sun is 4 × 1026 watts and its radius is 7 × 108 meter.
Sol: Poynting's vector (P) is the power passing through unit area (intensity).
So, P = 𝑃𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎 = 4 × 1026 4𝜋𝑟2 = 4 × 1026 616 × 1016 = 6.5 × 107 𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑠 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟2 3.
Consider a 100 W monochromatic point source that radiates equally in all directions in free space and is monitored at a distance of 1m.
Evaluate the amplitude of electric field at the point of detection.
Sol: 〈𝑃〉 = 𝑃𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎 = 100 4𝜋𝑟2 = 100 4 × 3.17×12 = 7.88 W/m2 Again, 〈𝑃〉 = 1 2 𝜀0cE0 2 = 7.88 W/m2 or, E0 2 = 2 × 7.88 𝜀0c = 5997 V2/m2 or, E0 = 77.44 V/m 4.
A laser beam has a diameter of 2mm.
What is the amplitude of the electric and magnetic field in the beam in vacuum if the power of the laser is 1.5 mW?
Sol: Here, diameter d = 2mm, so radius r = 1 mm = 0.001 m P = 𝑃𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 = 1.5 × 10−3 𝜋𝑟2 = 1.5 × 10−3 3.17×(0.001)2 = 477.7 W/m2 But, P is also equal to 1 2 𝜀0cE0 2.
Therefore, 1 2 𝜀0cE0 2 = 477.7 W/m2 Solving, we get E0 = 600 V/m H0= E0 𝑐μ0 = 1.593 amp-turn/m 5.
Calculate the skin depth for radio waves of 3 m wavelength (in free space) in copper, the electrical conductivity of which is 6 × 107 S/m.
Sol: Skin depth, d =√ 2 𝜇ω𝜎 Here, ω = 2𝜋𝑓 = 2𝜋𝑐 𝜆 = 2𝜋 × 108 rad/s Now, skin depth, d =√ 2 𝜇ω𝜎 = √ 2 4𝜋 × 107× 2𝜋 × 108 6 × 107 = 6.5 × 10−6 m. Practice Questions: Short and Medium Questions 1.
Evaluate the divergence of 2 2 2 A xy i y j yz k →    = + − at the point (1, 0, 2).
2.
Evaluate r → →  , where r → the position vector is.
3.
Evaluate Curl of the vector field 2 2 3 A xy i y j xyz k →    = + − .
4.
Evaluate divergence of the vector field 2 F xy i y j xyz k →    = + − at (1, 0, 1).
5.
Evaluate gradient of the scalar function f(x, y, z) = 2 xyz + 4 y2z + xz3 at (1, 2, 3).
6.
Write the value of Curl (grad f ), where f = x2 - 2y2 + 3z2.
7.
If 2 2 4 2 xy y z = + − , then find gradient of the above function at (1,2,3).
8.
If 𝐴⃗= 2𝑥3𝑧𝑖̂ + 3𝑥𝑦2𝑗̂ + 6𝑥𝑦𝑧 𝑘̂ , find div(curl 𝐴⃗) at (2 , 2, 1).
9.
Find the value of 'a' for which the vector field ˆ ˆ ˆ 3 v axi yj zk = + − is solenoidal.
10.
State the significance of gradient of a scalar function.
11.
State the significance of divergence of a vector function.
12.
State the significance of curl of a vector function.
13.
Show that the position vector 𝑟⃗ is an irrotational vector.
14.
State Gauss divergence theorem in vector calculus.
15.
Write the mathematical form of Stokes theorem in vector calculus.
16.
Show that the surface integral of the position vector over a closed surface is equal to three times the volume enclosed by the surface.
17.
Using Gauss divergence theorem prove that the volume of a sphere of radius r is 4/3 πr3.
18.
An electron and a proton is placed inside a sphere of radius 15 cm.
Calculate the net flux coming out of surface of sphere.
19.
Write the relation between electric displacement vector, electric field intensity and electric polarization vector.
20.
Write the S.I unit of electric displacement vector.
21.
State the Maxwell's equation, which supports the concept of non existence of magnetic monopole.
22.
Write Maxwell's electromagnetic equation in differential form which follows from the concept of displacement current.
23.
Distinguish between displacement current and conduction current.
24.
The electric field between two parallel metal plates of area 1cm2 changes at the rate of 1.2 x 108 v/ms.
Calculate the displacement current.
25.
The electromagnetic wave is propagating in free space with electric vector E (x, t) = e i(wt - kx) k  volt/m.
Deduce the magnetic vector.
26.
A non magnetic medium is characterized by relative permittivity 80.
Calculate the speed of electromagnetic wave in that medium.
27.
Write the S.I unit and direction of Poynting vector.
28.
One of the Maxwell's electromagnetic equations involves the curl of the electric field.
Write the equation and mention the law of electromagnetism which is represented by the equation.
29.
The magnetic flux  through a coil perpendicular to its plane is varying with time't' obeying the equation  = t2 +3t + 5 Weber.
Calculate the emf induced in the coil at time = 2 sec.
30.
Write down all four Maxwell's equations in electromagnetism.
31.
The electromagnetic wave is propagating in free space with electric vector 7 ( , ) 50cos(4 10 ) E z t t Kz i  =  − volt/meter.
Obtain an expression for magnetic vector.
32.
In free space electric field intensity is given by ( ) m volt x wt J E 20 cos 25 ˆ − =  .
Calculate the displacement current density.
33.
A medium is characterized by relative permittivity 45 & relative permeability 5; calculate the speed of an electromagnetic wave in the medium and the refractive index of the medium.
34.
Write the electromagnetic wave equation in terms of scalar potential by using Maxwell's field equations in free space.
35.
Calculate the value of pointing vector on sun, which radiates 4 x 1026 watts & its radius is 7 x 108m.
36.
If an electromagnetic wave is represented by ( ) ( ), cos 50 ˆ , ky wt Z t y E + =  with a diagram show the directions of the propagation of the wave, the electric field & magnetic fields of it and calculate the maximum value of H E   & .
37.
Find the impedance in vacuum, when an electromagnetic wave propagates in it.
38.
In an ionosphere there are approximately 1011 number of electrons per unit volume.
Calculate the plasma frequency of the medium.
( 0 = 8.85 x 10-12 and me = 9.11 x 10- 31 ,in S.I system).
39.
Write the physical significance of displacement current.
40.
The electric field between two parallel plates of area 2 cm2 changes at the rate of 1.2 x 108 V/m.s.
Calculate the displacement current.
41.
Calculate the speed of electromagnetic wave in vacuum.
12 7 0 0 ( 8.85 10 4 10 , .
).
and inS I system    − − =  =  42.
If an electromagnetic wave in free space is represented as ( ) ( ) ˆ , 30cos , B y t i t ky  = − show the direction of flow of energy in the electro-magnetic field and find the maximum value of its electric component.
43.
A laser beam of 100 watt source is focused on an area of 10-8m2.
Evaluate the magnitude of Poynting vector of the area.
44.
A 500 watt electric bulb is glowing with full capacity illuminating the space around it uniformly.
Calculate the amplitude of electric and magnetic field of radiation at a distance of 2 meters.
45.
If the electric field varies with time as 0 sin , E E t  = find the maximum displacement current density, where 0 0.1 E = V/m and 2 60   =  Hz.
Long Questions 1.
State Gauss's law in electrostatics.
Obtain its differential form in vacuum.
2.
State Gauss's law in electrostatic.
Obtain its differential form in a dielectric medium.
3.
State Faraday's laws of electromagnetism.
Obtain its differential form.
4.
State Ampere's circuital law.
Obtain its differential form.
5.
How is ampere's circuital law modified due to the presence of displacement current?
Obtain the corresponding Maxwell's equation.
6.
Write the four Maxwell's equations in differential form in a charge free non-conducting medium.
Mention the significance of Maxwell equations.
7.
Derive the electromagnetic wave equation in terms of electric vector/magnetic vector when the wave is propagating in vacuum/dielectric medium.
Obtain an expression for its velocity.
8.
Starting from Maxwell's electromagnetic equations, obtain the wave equation for E → in an ionized medium.
Identify the dissipative term in the equation.
9.
Show that electromagnetic wave is transverse in nature.
10.
Starting from Maxwell's equations, derive an expression for Poynting's theorem.
11.
State and explain Poynting's theorem.
State the direction and S.I unit of Poynting vector.
12.
Show that the average value of Poynting's vector for a plane electromagnetic wave is 1 2 √ ∈ 𝜇 𝐸0 2.
13.
Write Poynting's theorem in vector form.
For an electro-magnetic wave given by ( ) ( ) ˆ , 50cos H z t y t kz  = − , find the average energy crossing through a rectangular area of length 3cm.
and width 1.5cm.
in xy plane in one minute.
: INTRODUCTION TO QUANTUM PHYSICS Classical physics is dominated by two fundamental concepts.
The first is the concept of a particle, a discrete entity with definite position and momentum which moves in accordance with Newton's laws of motion.
The second is the concept of an electromagnetic wave, an extended physical entity with a presence at every point in space that is provided by electric and magnetic fields which change in accordance with Maxwell's laws of electromagnetism.
The classical world picture is neat and tidy: the laws of particle motion account for the material world around us and the laws of electromagnetic fields account for the light waves which illuminate this world.
This classical picture began to crumble in 1900 when Max Planck published a theory of black-body radiation; i.e.
a theory of thermal radiation in equilibrium with a perfectly absorbing body.
Planck provided an explanation of the observed properties of black-body radiation by assuming that atoms emit and absorb discrete quanta of radiation with energy E = hν, where ν is the frequency of the radiation and h is a fundamental constant of nature with value h = 6:626 x 10-34 Js.
This constant is now called Planck's constant.
In this chapter we shall see that Planck's constant has a strange role of linking wave-like and particle-like properties.
In so doing it reveals that physics cannot be based on two distinct, unrelated concepts, the concept of a particle and the concept of a wave.
These classical concepts, it seems, are at best approximate descriptions of reality.
There are a few phenomenon which the classical mechanics fail to explain.
1.
Stability of an atom 2.
Spectral series of Hydrogen atom 3.
Non-relativistic motion of proton, electron, neutron, atom etc (particles of atomic dimension).
4.
Discrete energy spectra 5.
Radioactive decay 6.
Black body radiation, photoelectric effect, Compton effect etc.
The most outstanding development in modern science was the conception of Quantum Mechanics in 1925.
This new approach was highly successful in explaining about the behavior of atoms, molecules and nuclei.
Max Planck in 1900 at a meeting of German Physical Society read his paper "On the theory of the Energy distribution law of the Normal Spectrum".
This was the start of the revolution of Physics i.e.
the start of Quantum Mechanics.
Quantum physics is a generalization of Classical Physics that includes classical laws as special cases.
Quantum Physics extends that range to the region of small dimensions.
Just as 'c' the velocity of light signifies universal constant, the Planck's constant characterizes Quantum Physics.
Photon: A packet or bundle of light energy is called a photon.
Energy of a photon is E = hν =hc/λ, where h is the Planck's constant, ν is the frequency of the radiation or photon, c is the speed of light (e.m. wave) and λ is the wavelength.
Properties of photons: i) Photons are the carriers of electromagnetic interaction(force) ii) A photon travels at a speed of light c in vacuum.
(i.e.
3 x 108 m/s) iii) It has zero rest mass.
i.e.
the photon cannot exist at rest.
iv) The kinetic mass of a photon is, m =E/c2= h/cλ.The momentum of a photon is, p =h/λ=E/c v) Photons travel in a straight line.
vi) Energy of a photon depends upon frequency of the photon; so the energy of the photon does not change when photon travels from one medium to another.
vii) Wavelength of the photon changes in different media; so, velocity of a photon is different in different media.
viii) Photons are electrically neutral.
ix) Photons may show diffraction under given conditions.
x) Photons are not deviated by magnetic and electric fields.
xi) Photons can be created (pair annihilation) or destroyed (pair production).
Particle aspects of radiation: Everything in the world is a wave; everything in the world is a particle.
They are the manifestation of same thing in different forms.
The particle aspects of radiation are exhibited in the phenomena of blackbody radiation, photoelectric effect, Compton scattering and pair production Black body radiation: A black body is an idealized physical body that absorbs all incident electromagnetic radiation, regardless of frequency or angle of incidence.
A simple example of a black body radiator is the furnace.
If there is a small hole in the door of the furnace heat energy can enter from the outside.
The name "black body" is given because it absorbs radiation in all frequencies, not because it only absorbs.
Indeed, a black body can also emit radiation.
On the contrary, a white body is one with a rough surface that reflects all incident rays completely and uniformly in all directions.
A black body in thermal equilibrium (that is, at a constant temperature) emits electromagnetic radiation called black-body radiation.
The distribution of radiant energy among the various frequencies components of the black body radiation depends on its temperature.
The energy distribution curve for black body radiation shows the following characteristics Non-uniform distribution of energy density At a given temperature the energy density has maximum value corresponding to a value of frequency or wavelength.
The frequency corresponds to maximum energy density increases with increase of temperature (wavelength decreases with increasing temperature).
The energy density decreases to zero for both higher and lower values of frequency or wavelength.
The energy density corresponding to a given frequency or wavelength increases with increase of temperature.
Many formulations are formulated to explain the above experimental observations like Stefan-Boltzmann law, Wein's displacement law and Planck's radiation formula.
Out of which Planck's radiation formula successfully explains the theory of black body radiation.
Planck's theory is based on quantum physics whereas other two theories are classical physics.
Planck's law of black body radiations: "Blackbody radiation" or "cavity radiation" refers to an object or system which absorbs all radiation incidents upon it and re-radiates energy which is characteristic of this radiating system only, not dependent upon the type of radiation which is incident upon it.
The radiated energy can be considered to be produced by standing wave or resonant modes of the cavity which is radiating.
The Planck radiation formula is an example of the distribution of energy according to Bose- Einstein statistics.
The above expressions are obtained by multiplying the density of states in terms of frequency or wavelength times the photon energy times the Bose-Einstein distribution function with normalization constant A=1.
At low wavelength (high frequency), Plank's law reduces to Wien's law and at high wavelength (low frequency) Planck's theory reduces to Rayleigh-Jeans law (i) At low wavelength, hc/λkT is very large, 1 can be neglected as compared to the exponential term.
Sλ = 8𝜋ℎ𝑐 𝜆5 𝑒−ℎ𝑐/𝜆𝑘𝑇 dλ It is Wien's law (ii) At high wavelength, hc/λkT is very small 𝑒ℎ𝑐/𝜆𝑘𝑇 = 1 + hc/λkT Planck's formula becomes 8𝜋𝑘𝑇 𝜆4 dλ, which is Rayleigh-Jeans law.
Photoelectric Effect: The phenomenon of emission of electrons from mainly metal surfaces exposed to light energy (X - rays, γ - rays, UV rays, Visible light and even Infra Red rays) of suitable frequency is known as photoelectric effect.
The electrons emitted by this effect are called photoelectrons.
The current constituted by photoelectrons is known as photoelectric current.
Note: Nonmetals also show photoelectric effect.
Liquids and gases also show this effect but to limited extent.
Laws/characteristics of photoelectric effect: This shows that even in the absence of accelerating potential, a few photoelectrons manage to reach the plate on their own due to their K.E.
When -ve potential is applied to the plate A w.r.t.
C, photoelectric current becomes zero at a particular value of -ve potential called stopping potential PfteHtieff ofqtentieht light does not affect the stopping potential.
3) Effect of Frequency of Incident Light on Photoelectric Current: For a fixed intensity of incident light, the photoelectric current does not depend on the frequency of the incident light.
Because, the photoelectric current simply depends on the number of photoelectrons emitted and in turn on the number of photons incident and not on the energy of photons.
4) Effect of Frequency of Incident Light on Stopping Potential: For a fixed intensity of incident light, the photoelectric current increases and is saturated with increase in +ve Saturation Current potential applied to the anode.
However, the saturation current is samefordifferentfreguenciesofthe incident lights.
When potentialis decreased and Vs1 takenbelow zero,photoelectric Potential of A (V) currentdecreasestozerobutat different stopping potentials for different frequencies.
Higher the frequency, higher the stopping potential.
i.e.
Vs aα V 5) Threshoid Frequency: Thegraphb stopping potential andfrequency does not pass through the origin.
It shows that there is a minimum value of frequency calledthreshold (V) frequencybelow which photoelectric emissionis not possible however high the intensity of incident light may be.
It depends on the nature of the metal emittingphotoelectrons LawsofPhotoelectricEmission: For givensubstance there is a minimum value of frequency of incident light calledthreshold which uencybelow photoelectricemissionis possible, of incident light may be The number of photoelectrons emitted per second (i.e.
photoelectric current) is directly proportional to the intensity of incident light provided the frequency is above the threshold frequency.
kineticenergy yofthephotoelectronsis directlyproportional to thefrequency provided the frequencyis above the threshold frequency.
iv) The maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons is independent of the intensity of the incident light.
Theprocess of photoelectricemissionisinstantaneous.i.e.as soonasthe photon of suitable frequency falls on the substance, it emits photoelectrons vi) The photoelectric emission is one-to-one.
i.e.
for every photon of suitable frequency one electron is emitted.
Einstein's Photoelectric Equation: When a photon of energy hv falls on a metal surface, the energy of the photonis absorbedbythe electronandis usedintwo ways: A part of energy is used to overcome the surface barrier and come out of the metal surface.
This part of the energy is called 'work function' (Φ = hvo).
i) The remaining part of the energy is used in giving a velocity 'v' to the emitted photoelectron.
This is equal to the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons ( / mv?, ) where 'm' is mass of the photoelectron.
According to law of conservation of energy, hv = Φ + / mV2max Photon hv = hVo+ / mv2 1 mv2 ax Photoelectron 1/z mvmax x= h( v -Vo = hVo Metal Verification of Laws of Photoelectric Emissionbased on Einstein's Photoelectric Equation: / mV2max = h(v - Vo) If v < Vo, then /, mv?max is negative, which is not possible.
Therefore, for photoelectric emission to take place v > Vo.
Since one photon emits one electron,so the numberphotoelectrons emitted per second is directly proportional to the intensity of incident light.
ii) It is clear that / mvmax a v as h and Vo are constant.
This shows that K.E.
of the photoelectrons is directly proportional to the frequency of the incident light.
iv) Photoelectric emission is due to collision between a photon and an electron.
As such there can not be any significant time lag between the incidence of photon and emission of photoelectron.
i.e.
the process is instantaneous.
It is found that delay is only 10-8 seconds.
Application of Photoelectric Effect: Automaticfirealarm Automatic burglar alarm Scanners in Television transmission Reproduction of sound in cinema film 5.
In paperindustryto measure the thickness ofpaper 6.
To locate flaws or holes in the finished goods 7.
In astronomy 8.
To determine opacity of solids and liquids 9.
Automatic switching of street lights 1o.To controlthe temperature offurnace Compton Effect When a monochromatic beam of X-ray is scattered by a light element, the scattered radiation contains two wavelengths- (i) Same as incident wavelength (Thomson component) (ii) Greater than incident wavelength (Compton component).
This is called Compton effect.
The phenomenon of change in wavelength of incident radiation upon scattering from a material is called Compton effect.
According to classical physics, when an electromagnetic radiation of a particular frequency and wavelength is incident on atoms, the atomic electrons oscillate with the frequency of the incident radiation.
Due to this oscillation, the electrons radiate EM waves of same frequency and wavelength.
Thus, classical electromagnetic theory cannot explain the change in wavelength of the scattered radiation observed in Compton effect.
Compton made the following assumptions (quantum assumptions) (i) Electromagnetic radiation is quantized.
It consists of discrete packets of energy hν, where ν is the frequency of the wave.
These packets are called photons which behave as particles.
(ii) When an electromagnetic wave is incident on a medium, the photons collide with the target electrons (iii) In these collisions, photons lose energy to target electrons.
So, energy of photons decreases and wavelength of the photons photon incident the of h wavelengt of t independen is shift compton the seen that is it above From scattering of angle is in vacuum light of speed is and electron, an of mass is constant, s Planck' is ; ) 1( by given is wavelength in change then the ly, respective and is radiation scattered and incident of hs wavelengt the If 0 0       c m h Cos c m h − = −   process collission in the conserved are momenta and Energy ly.
respective and angles at scattered is electron the and photon the collission After rest.
at electron an with collides energy of photon A : shift Compton of Derivation    h          pSin pCos y x p c m c p mc E Sin c h Cos c h y x h c m x c h h and directions and the along collission after electron the of Momentum momentum electron is here ; collission after electron the of Energy and directions and the along collission after photon the of Momentum collission after photon the of Energy collission before electron the of Energy 0 collission before electron the of Momentum dirction] [along collission before photon the of Momentum collission before photon the of Energy 4 2 0 2 2 2 2 0 = + = = =   =  = = = = = )1 ......( )......... ( 2 ) ( or, sides] both [squring ) ( 2 ) ( or, ) ( or, ) ( or, : energy of on conservati From 2 0 2 2 2 2 2 0 4 2 0 2 2 4 2 0 2 2 2 0 4 2 0 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 0                − +  − =  − + +  − = + +  − = + +  − = +  = + c hm h c p c hm c m h c m c p c m h c m c p c m h mc mc h c m h                                       Cos h h h c hm h Cos h h h c p Sin h Cos h Cos h h c p Sin h pcSin pSin Sin c h y Cos h h pcCos pCos Cos c h c h x  −  + =  − +  −  +  −  + =  +  −  + =  = −  =  − = +  = 2 2 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 ) ( 2 ) 2 ( - can write we (4), and (1) Eq From ) 4 .........( 2 or, 2 - (3) and (2) Eq adding and Squaring ) 3 ........( or, 0 : axis along on conservati momentum From ) 2 ........( or, : axis along on conservati momentum From Pair Production: When high energy photons (γ- rays) pass near an atomic nucleus, it converts fully into an electron, e- and positron, e+.
This phenomenon is called pair production.
In pair production, electromagnetic energy is converted into matter (e + and e- ).
In this process, charge, mass and momentum are conserved.
Why γ- ray is suitable for pair production- Suppose electron and positron are at rest.
The rest mass is m0.
The rest energy of electron and positron are E= m0c2 +m0c2 =2 m0c2 =1.02 MeV .
The energy comes from the incident ray.
The frequency of the ray of energy 1.02 MeV energy is ν= E/h ~2.5 ×1020 Hz γ rays have frequency in this range.
So, g ray is used in pair production.
radiation incident the of gth in wavelen change i.e., shift, Compton describes ) 5 .
( ) 5 ( )......... 1( , ) 1( , ) 1( , ) 1( 2 ) ( 2 , 0 0 0 2 0 Eq Cos c m h or Cos c m h or Cos c m h c c or Cos h c hm or              − =  − = −  − = −  −  =  − o 0 o o o 0 0 electron) the striking after back recoils electron case in this shift, Compton of value maximum (the A 04852 .0 , 180 When (iv) radiation incident of h wavelengt of t independen is gth in wavelen Change (iii) A 02426 .0 , 90 when , in increase with incresaes (ii) radiation incident of direction the along place h takes wavelengt of change No ; so 0, 0, When (i) : Features ) 1( 02426 .0 A 02426 .0 electron, For velength Compton wa called is =  = =  =  =  =  = − =  = =               Cos c m h c c  Pair Annihilation: In this case an electron, e- and positron, e+ comes together due to Coulomb attraction and they are destroyed.
The total mass is converted into energy.
This phenomenon is called pair annihilation.
In pair annihilation, matter (e+ and e- ) is converted to electromagnetic energy In this process, charge, mass and momentum are conserved.
Why pair production is not possible in free space: In free space hν= mc2+mc2=2mc2 Considering the momentum conservation- hν/c = 2p cosθ, Or, hν= 2pc cosθ =2m(v/c)c2 cosθ <2mc2 [as v/c <1 and cosθ<1] This violates the conservation of energy, so pair production is not possible in free space.
Wave aspect of particles De-Broglie theory of matter waves: A particle in motion has wave nature.
The wave associated with the particle is called matter wave or de-Broglie wave.
For a photon, E = hν Also, the relativistic energy is given by E=[ p2c2 + m02c4]1/2, the rest mass of photon =0 Hence, E = pc, Comparing we get, P = h/λ (2) .......... .......... .......... 2 kT ~ is energy linetic the neutron, l For therma : (1) ...... .......... A 3.
12 qV 2 V difference voltage a through passing charge electric an For 2m p energy kinetic is E ere Wh ; E 2 So, particle the of momentum is and constant s Planck' is ; by given is e matter wav the of h wavelengt The o 2 mkT h λ CaseII V m h λ Case I: m h mv h λ p h p h λ = = = = = = = Phase velocity and Group velocity of De-Broglie waves A wave is associated with a moving particle.
The velocity of the wave is called phase velocity.
When a few wave of nearly equal wavelength is superposed, a wave packet is formed.
The velocity of the wave packet is called group velocity.
The group velocity of a wave is given by vg=dw/dk, where w is the angular frequency and k is wave number.
It is observed that the phase velocity of matter wave associated with a particle of mass m and velocity v is different from particle velocity.
The group velocity associated with the particle is same as particle velocity.
(3) ......... .......... ) 2 ( So, ) 2 ( So, 2 E or, c m - E E Energy Kinetic : particles ic relativist For 2 0 2 0 2 2 4 2 0 2 0 4 2 0 2 k 2 0 2 2 4 2 0 2 0 k c m E E hc p h c c m E E p c p c m c m E c m c m c p c m k k k k k + = = + = + = + + − + = =  v m p mc pc dp c m c p d dp dE c c m mc p E m p m p m p dp d dp dE dk d m m m p m m p p E p E k k h h E k h h p = = = + = =  = = = = = =     = = = = = = = = = = = = =  = = =  = = 2 2 4 2 0 2 2 g p 2 2 p 2 g 2 2 2 2 2 2 p p v particle free ic relativist of velocity Group ] v because e [impossibl v v v particle free ic relativist of velocity Phase particle ic Relativist v 2 2 2 v particle free a with associated e matter wav of velocity Group 2 v v 2 v v 2 v 2 / v : particle free a with associated e matter wav a of velocity Phase : particles istic Nonrelativ v : es matter wav of velocity phase Therefore, 2 2 e matter wav a of Energy 2 2 : es matter wav of theory Broglie - De From                 Characteristics of matter waves: (i) A matter wave is associated with a particle in motion.
The wave nature becomes apparent only for very small particles (atomic dimension).
For large bodies, wavelength is so small that wave properties are not visible.
(ii) Wavelength of matter wave ranges from zero to infinity.
(iii) Matter waves can be observed experimentally.
(iv) Matter waves are independent of the charge of the particle.
(v) Velocity of the matter wave is variable.
(vi) Matter waves show phenomenon like interference, diffraction, etc.
Q: why matter waves are not observed in daily life?
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle (1928): It states that for a particle of atomic dimension in motion, it is impossible to simultaneously determine the position and momentum of the particle with perfect accuracy.
The principle of uncertainty follows from wave particle duality.
2 .
rotation of angle and momentum angular (ii) 2 .
- time and energy (i) between valid is y uncertaint of principle similar A ly.
respective direction, z and y along motion for 2 .
and 2 .
Similarly, 2 ; 2 .
then , direction x along motion for momentum in y uncertaint is and position in y uncertaint is If                   =        L t E p z p y h p x p x z y x x mechanics classical to tends mechanics quantum limit in this and accuracy perfect with determined be can particle heavy of momentum and position the So large.
is m because 0 .
particle heavy For particle) the of mass is (m 2 .
get we momentum and position in relation y uncertaint the From (ii) versa - vice and accurate less very become momentum in accuracy hen the accuracy t high with determined is position if that means This 0 , when and ,0 When (i) : relation y uncertaint of ce Significan →      →   →   →  →  x x x x v x m v x p x p x  Applications of uncertainty principle: (i) Non existence of electrons in the atomic nucleus (ii) Ground state energy of harmonic oscillator (iii) Ground state energy of hydrogen atom (i) Non existence of electrons in the atomic nucleus (ii) Ground state energy of harmonic oscillator nucleus.
the inside reside not can electrons Hence 4MeV.
be to found is decay during nucleus the from emitted electron of energy maximum The 20 2m ) ( 2 ) p ( E is electron the of energy kinetic minimum The p is momentum the g determinin in y uncertaint minimum The m 10 2 diameter nuclear is nucleus the inside electron the of position the finding in y uncertaint maximum Then nucleus.
the inside exists electrons Suppose 2 max 2 2 min max min 15 max    =  =       −  MeV x m x x   (2) .
.......... 2 1 8 as (1) Eq using obtained is oscillator harmonic the of energy state ground The 2 1 2 2 1 2 oscillator harmonic the of Energy (1) ......... 2 or, 2 .
principle y uncertaint the From and oscillator the of momentum and position in y uncertaint the as order same the of is state ground in the p momentum and position x of value minimum The principle y uncertaint to due value minimum a has energy state ground the mechanics, quantum In 0. oscillator harmonic a of energy state ground the physics, classical to According .
oscillator harmonic a of state energy minimum or lowest the is state ground The 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 x x m mx E x m m p kx m p E x p p x p x x x x x x   + = + = + = =    =    (iii) Ground state energy of hydrogen atom t. significan is energy this molecule, as bound atoms or two atom an in electron like s oscillator quantum In s. oscillator c macroscopi for measured be not can energy this So Joule).
10 (~ small very is energy this of magnitude The .
oscillator harmonic quantum a of energy minimum or energy state ground the is This ) 4 .
( .......... 2 1 4 1 4 1 2 2 1 2 .
8 as (3) and (2) Eq from obtained is oscillator harmonic the of energy state ground The (3) ......... 2 or, 4 or, 8 2 or, 0 8 2 - , (2) from or, ,0 so minimum, is state ground at 34 - 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 4 3 2 2 2 3 2                     = + = + =     = = = = + =   m m m m E E m x m x mx x m x m mx x E E (3) ...... .......... 4 1 2 is atom Hydrogen the of enrgy the So, (2) ......... or, .
- relation y uncertaint to according Then, magnitude.
their of order the of is momentum and position is y uncertaint the minimum, is energy the where state ground in the that assume We orbit.
Bohr the of radius the is electron.
the of energy potenrial the represent term second the and orbit Bohr in the electron the of momentum the is p where ; (1) ........ 4 1 2 atom hydrogen a of energy The 2 0 2 2 2 0 2 r e mr E r p p r r r e m p E   − = = = − =    Questions Short answer type 1.
How does the kinetic energy of the emitted photoelectron depend on intensity of the incident radiation?
2.
Define work function in photoelectric effect.
3.
Define stopping potential.
How does it depend on frequency of incident radiation?
4.
What are the laws of photoelectric effect?
5.
Explain graphically the variation of stopping potential with frequency of incident light in case of photoelectric effect.
6.
Define Compton effect 7.
Under what condition is the Compton shift a minimum, in the Compton effect?
8.
What is Compton wavelength?
What is the difference between Compton shift and Compton wavelength?
9.
How does the Compton shift depend on wavelength of incident radiation?
10.
Define pair production.
11.
What physical quantities are conserved in pair production?
12.
Why gamma ray photon is suitable for pair production?
13.
Why is pair production not possible in vacuum?
14.
Why a radiation of 1 Å wavelength cannot produce pair production?
15.
What is de-Broglie wave?
atom Hydrogen of energy state Ground and radius Bohr for expression the is (5) and (4) Equation (5) .. .......... 32 16 32 ) 4 ( ) 4 ( 2 4 4 4 2 energy state ground the (1), From (4) .. .......... 4 or, 2 2 4 e or, 0 4 e 2 2 above, (2) and (1) From ,0 state, ground At 2 0 2 2 4 2 0 2 2 4 2 0 2 2 4 2 0 2 4 2 0 2 4 2 2 0 2 0 2 2 2 0 4 2 2 0 2 3 2 2 0 2 2 0 2 3 2                          me me me me m e m me e me m E me r mr r r mr r E r E − = − = − =       −       = = = = + − =   =   16.
Write wave particle duality in case of matter wave.
17.
How matter waves differ from electromagnetic wave?
18.
Find the de-Broglie wavelength for a particle of mass m moving with kinetic energy E. 19.
What is Heisenberg's uncertainty principle?
20.
Explain how wave particle duality leads to uncertainty.
Long answer type 1.
What is photoelectric effect?
Write the laws of photoelectric effect.
Graphically show the variation of photocurrent with intensity, kinetic energy of photoelectron with frequency and stopping potential with frequency of incident radiation.
2.
What is photoelectric effect?
Derive Einstein's photoelectric equation.
Explain the laws of photoelectric effect from it.
3.
(i) Define stopping potential, threshold frequency and work function in the phenomenon of photoelectric effect.
(ii) The work function of aluminum is 4.2 eV.
Calculate the kinetic energy of the fastest and slowest photoelectrons, stopping potential and the cutoff wavelength when light of wavelength 4000 Å falls on the clean aluminum surface.
4.
What is Compton scattering?
Derive an expression for Compton shift with suitable diagram.
5.
(i) State and explain Compton effect with a neat diagram.
Discuss how it differs from the photoelectric effect.
(ii) Can X-rays of wavelength 1 Å undergo pair production?
6.
(i) State and explain Compton effect.
(ii) In an experiment on Compton scattering, the wavelength of the incident radiation is 1.8 Å.
Calculate the wavelength of the radiation scattered at 450.
Calculate the speed and the direction of the recoiled electron.
7.
What do you mean by pair production?
Calculate the threshold energy for pair production.
Show that pair production is not possible in vacuum.
8.
(i) What is matter wave?
What are the properties of matter wave?
Obtain an expression for de-Broglie wavelength of matter wave for an electron of mass m moving in an electric field of potential V volt.
9.
State Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
Using this prove that the ground state energy of hydrogen atom is non-zero.
10.
State Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
Using this prove that the ground state energy of harmonic oscillator is non-zero.
11.
State Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
Using this prove that the non-existence of electron inside the nucleus.
Numerical 1.
Calculate the momentum of an X-ray having a wavelength of 0.7 X 10-10 m. 2.
Find the energy of a gamma ray photon having wavelength of 1 Ao , given that 3. h=6.62X10-27 erg-s. 4.
Define work function of a metal.
How it can be expressed in terms of threshold frequency?
Find the work function of a metal in eV, whose threshold wavelength is 6000 Å.
5.
In an experiment tungsten cathode which has a threshold wavelength 2000 Å is irradiated by ultra-violet light of wavelength 1800 Å.
Calculate the maximum energy of emitted photoelectrons and work function of the metal in electron volts.
6.
Find the Compton shift for X-rays of wavelength 1.3 A0, scattered by 600.
Find the wavelength of scattered X-rays (m0= 9.1×10-31 kg).
7.
X-rays of wavelength 1.0 A0 are scattered from a carbon block.
Find the wavelength of the scattered beam in a direction making 900 with incident beam.
How much kinetic energy is imparted to the recoiling electron?
8.
Under what condition the Compton shift is equal to i) Zero ii) 0.0242Å iii) Twice the Compton wavelength.
9.
Calculate the de-Broglie wavelength of a particle of mass 3gm moving with a speed of 400 m/s.
10.
The De-Brogile wavelength associated with a neutron is 1.4 X 10-10 m whose mass is 1.675X10-27 kg.
Estimate its kinetic energy in eV.
Also calculate its velocity.
11.
Estimate the de-Broglie wavelength for a beam of electrons whose energy is 20 eV.
12.
13.
An electron is accelerated by a potential difference V volts, has a de Broglie wavelength λ.
If the electron is accelerated by a potential difference of 4V volts, find its de-Broglie wavelength.
14.
An electron has a speed of 400 m/sec, with an accuracy of 0.005 %.
Find the uncertainty of the position of the electron.
15.
The energy width of an excited state in a system is 1.5 eV.
What is the average lifetime of that state?
16.
For an electron moving with a velocity 2X107 m/s, estimate the smallest possible uncertainty in the position of the electron.
17.
Calculate the minimum electron energy in the hydrogen atom using uncertainty principle (Atomic radius is 0.53 Å ).
: QUANTUM MECHANICS-II Transition from the deterministic to probabilistic description: In classical physics the physical quantities like position, momentum etc can be determined exactly at any time and the value of these quantities at a later time can be predicted through equation of motion.
In quantum mechanics, uncertainty principle imposes a restriction on the exact value of a physical quantity.
So, in quantum physics, instead of having exact values, there are a number of allowed values with different probabilities.
In classical physics, intensity of a wave at a point depends on square of amplitude of the wave at that point, whereas in quantum physics, probability of finding a particle at a point depends on square of amplitude of the wave at that point.
For a system, instead of a single sharply defined value, a physical quantity can take a large number of different values with different probability.
Each of these values corresponds to a possible state of the system.
The General state of the system is a linear superposition of all such possible states.
The observed value of the physical quantity is the weighted average of the different values.
Example: if a particle can have energy E1, E2, E3 with probability 0.7, 0.2, and 0.1, respectively, then the observed energy will be the weighted average Eav=0.7E1+0.2E2+0.1E3.
The general state of a physical system is described by wave function Y (x,y,z,t).
The state of a system changes with time.
The time variation in Y is described by Schrodinger equation.
Wave function of matter wave and characteristics of wave function: .
(vii) condition ion normalizat the called is 1 (vi) state in the system the finding of density) ty (probabili e unit volum per y probabilit the represents quantity The (v) places all at continuous are x derivative s it' and (iv) quantity; complex a is (iii) function.
valued single is it t), z, y, (x, time and position of function a is (ii) .
determined be can that system a about n informatio the all contains tion which representa al mathematic a is particle a of function Wave (i) 2 space all space all V * 2 * meaning physical direct no has it and finite be must dV dV ib a V                 = = =   + = =   = = (Here ψ* is the complex conjugate of ψ, and ψ ψ* = a2 + b2 i.e.
real & has physical meaning.
Ψ is called probability amplitude but ψ* ψ is called probability density) The time dependent Schrodinger equation: ) 4 ..( .......... 2 is equation the So operators.
as equation above in the term both the consider we mechanics, quantum In , 2 particle free a for that know We ) 3 .........( .......... .......... .
or, . )
2 ( .......... .......... or, .
)1( is function wave particle free The and know we ic.
relativist - non is particle the of motion Let F. force a of action under the direction x along moving is m mass of particle free a consider We 2 2 ) ( 2 2 2 2 2 2 ) ( 2 2 ) ( x ) (              E m p E m p t i E iE Ae iE t x p p Ae p i p i x p i Ae p i x Ae Ae Ae ψ E k p x x Et px i x x Et px i x x x Et px i Et) (px i Et px i wt kx i x = = =   = − = − =     − = − = =   = =   − − − − − − = = = = = − − − −       − −                  ) 7 ( .......... 2 - (3) and (2) eq from or, ) ........(6 2 p is equation er Schoreding the Thus 2 p Energy Potential energy Kinetic E is particle the of energy the V(x), potential a in moving is particle the If dimension one in equation r Schrodinge particle free is This ; ) 5 .
( .......... 2 get to (3) and (2) eq.
from E and p of values put the we 2 2 2 2 x 2 x 2 2 2 x t i V x m E V m V m t i x m   = +   − = + + = + =   =   −             Equation (7) and equation (5) are the required one dimensional Schrodinger's time dependent wave equation for a free particle and bound particle respectively.
(E = hν = 𝒉 𝟐 𝝅 x 2π ν = ħω and p = 𝒉 𝝀 = 𝒉 𝟐 𝝅 x 𝟐𝝅 𝝀 = ħk, k is called wave number or propagation constant) The time independent Schrodinger equation: Equation (10) is the required time independent Schrodinger equation for a bound particle.
Here ψo is only function of position.
t i m z y x t i V m   =  − =       +   +   =    = +  −          2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 becomes equation the So 0, V , 3D in particle free a For ; 2 - becomes equation r Schrodinge dimension, In three 0 2 - becomes (10) eq so 0 V particle free a For ) 10 .
( .......... 0 ) ( 2 , 2 , .
.
i .
2 get to 2 .
equation r Schrodinge in (9) and (8) substitute we ) 9 .........( .......... .
. )
8 ...( .......... function.
wave the of part space the is here ; 0 2 2 0 2 0 2 2 0 2 0 0 2 0 2 2 0 0 2 0 2 2 2 2 2 0 2 0 2 2 2 0 0 ) ( = +   = = − +   = +   −      − = +   − +   − =        − =     =   = = = − − − − − − − −                     E m x V E m x or E V x m or Ee i e V x e m V x m t i Ee i t x e x e e Ae Ae Et i Et i Et i Et i Et i Et i Et i x p i Et px i x                   Principle of superposition: Probability density: Dimension of Ψ: 2 1 1 2 1 2 2 2 3 3 2 ~ ; ~ : 1 ~ ; ~ : 2 ~ ; ~ : 3D of Dimension − − − − − − = = = L L length y probabilit D L L Area y probabilit D L L Volume y probabilit        Normalized wave function: equation.
r Schrodinge the solving by obtained are states allowed the system, given a For state in be will system y that the probabilit the is ts coefficien the of square The equation.
r Schrodinge of solution a also is ......... solutions the of n combinatio linear then the equation, r Schrodinge of solutions the are ... .......... , , It exist can system he in which t ... .......... , , states possible different of ion superposit linear a is system the of state general a ng representi function wave The i 2 n n 2 2 1 1 n 2 1 n 2 1              i n n n c c c c c  = + + + = normalized be to said is case In this 1 is space entire e within th somewhere is particle y that the probabilit The P is dx x and between x particle the finding of y probabilit the axis, - x along motion as such dimension, one In P is V volume a in particle the finding of y probabilit The P by given is dV volume a in particle the finding of y probabilit The e. unit volum per state in system the the finding of y probabilit the as desbcribed is It density.
y probabilit the called is P : density y Probabilit space all V 2 2 2 V * 2             = + = = + = = = dV dx dV dV dV dx x x V Eigen states, Eigen function and Eigen values: (Numbers of definite states which are allowed for the system are called eigen states.
The wave function associated with eigen state is called eigen function.
The eigen values of a physical quantity of a given system is defined as the set of permitted values of the physical quantity of the given system.)
ion wavefunct normalized the is , case In this 1 N or or, ?
ion wavefunct normalized the is then what , If normalized be to said is function wave e then th 1 If space all * space all * space all 2 space all 2 space all 2 * N dV N N dV N dV N dV dV dV V V V V V V           = = = = = =       = = = = = s. observable called quantities physical real to correspons They .
quantities real are s eigenvalue But numbers.
complex general in are quantity a by multiplied back give to on operates A .
eigenvalue the is and operator an is Aˆ equation.
eigenvalue called is equation above The )1( .......... Aˆ .
eigenvalue called is value This ion.
eigenfunct on the operator ing correspond the operating by determined be can eigenstate an in quanity the of value The operators.
by d represente are etc energy momentum, like quantities physical each mechanics, quantum In s. eigenstate or functions eigen called are states these ng representi ions wavefunct the and s eigenstate called are states These ......... ies.
probabilit different with states of number a of ion superposit a is system a of state general a mechanics, quantum In i i i i n n 2 2 1 1             i i i i i n n n a a a Number c c c c = = + + + =  Expectation Value: In quantum mechanics we talk of probable values of the physical quantities instead of actual values (due to inherent uncertainty).
If we make several measurements of a physical parameter of a system under similar situations then all the measured values do not come out same.
The average of all these measured values of a physical quantity is called its expectation value.
For any physical quantity defined by an operator O, the expectation value is given by < O> = ∫ 𝛹∗ Ô 𝛹 ∞ −∞ dx , in one dimension.
Here, 𝛹∗ is the complex conjugate of Ψ.
For position, < x > = ∫ 𝛹∗ x̂ 𝛹 ∞ −∞ dx For momentum, < p> = ∫ 𝛹∗ p̂ 𝛹 ∞ −∞ dx operator energy called is Therefore, or, ; 2 i- i- 2 1 2 1 2 1 is operator energy Kinetic Therefore , 2 energy Kinetic i- is operator momentum the 3D in ; operator momentum called is i- Therefore, value a give to on operates i- i- or, is function wave particle free The direction - x along moving function wave particle free a consider We operators energy and energy, Kinetic Momentum, ) ( 2 2 2 2 ) ( x ) ( t i E t i iE Ae iE t x m x x m p p m p p m m p x p x p x p i Ae p i x Ae Et px i x x x x x x x x Et px i Et x p i x   =   − = − =     − =     = = =      =   = =   = − − −                           Applications of Quantum Mechanics: (1) Particle in a one-dimensional box (infinite deep potential well): We consider one dimensional motion of a particle of mass m confined between two rigid walls of a box of width a.
The potential in the box is zero and the potential at the rigid walls is infinity.
The particle is confined in the box due to infinite potential of the walls.
This is one- dimensional particle in a box problem.
This is the example of a bound system.
Classically, the energy of the particle is continuous.
Quantum Mechanics dictates that the energy of the particle will be discrete integral values.
Figure looks like a potential well of infinite height.
a x x x V a x x V    =   = and 0 for ) ( 0 for 0 ) ( is potential the of form The (1) .. .......... and 0 for 0 ) ( or, and 0 for 0 ) ( potential infinite to due zero is box the outside region in the particle the finding of y probabilit The 2 a x x x a x x x P   =   = =   ......(4) .......... as written be can which , C C is eq(2) of solution general The ) 3 .........( .......... 2 ), 2 .
( .......... 0 or, 0] V [ 0 2 or, 0 ) ( 2 - is box the inside equation r Schrodinge t independen time The 2 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 BCoskx ASinkx e e mE k k dx d E m dx d V E m dx d ikx ikx + = + = = = + = = + = − + −             0 - get we of continuity of condition the from So 0 for and 0 for 0 ,0 At and 0 boundaries at the constant and finite be should and that constant boundary the from determined are B and A ts coefficien The 0 = +  + =  = = = = = x BCoskx ASinkx x BCoskx ASinkx x x a x x dx dψ     ) 5 .
( .......... eq(4), form So, 0 or, ASinkx B = =  ) 7 ( .......... .......... 2 2 particle the of energy The Therefore, 2 eq(3), From ) 6 .....( .......... or, ] 0 and 0 because excluded is 0 [n ..... 4 ,3,2 ,1 where , or 0 So, x of values all at 0 (x) makes this because ,0 0 at 0 ) ( get we , at of condition continuity the From s eigenvalue Energy 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 n ma m k E mE k a n k a k n n ka Sinka A ASinkx a x x a x a x           = = = =   = = = = =  = = = = = = .
increasing with increases states energy e between th spacing The (iv) .
equispaced - t uniform/no - non , 1) (2n is level energy e consicutiv o between tw spacing The (iii) .
E En .
.
number) integer ( by given is states higher the of energy The (ii) etc.
state excited 2nd called is 3 state, excited 1st is 2 states.
excited called are 2,3,.... n states The zero.
- non is energy pont o energy/zer state Ground energy.
point zero called is energy The state.
ground the called is This .
2 ,1 for lowest is particle the of energy The discrete.
are es eigen valu Energy (i) Features system.
the of state different to s correspond integer the of values Different quantized.
or discrete is box l dimensiona - one an in particle a of energy that the shows (7) Equation 1 1 2 2 1 2 2 2 1 n E n e i E n n E ma E n n + =  = = = = =   De-Broglie wavelength for particle in a box: K = 𝑛𝜋 𝑎 = 2𝜋 𝜆 Hence, λ = 2𝑎 𝑛 Ground state, n=1, So, λground = 2a (maximum wavelength) For first excited state, n=2, λ1st excited = a Similarly, for other excited states de-Broglie wavelength can be calculated.
(2) Potential Barrier: The sharpest increase of potential energy to certain value at a point and a sharpest fall of the potential energy to zero at another point and remaining constant continuously over the interval constitute a potential barrier.
    a a n Sin ka Sin n ka o ka Sin a k kx Sin x dx kx Cos kxdx Sin dx a x x dx a a a a a 2 A or ,1 2 A Therefore, 0 2 2 , (5), eq From ,1 2 0 2 A or, 1 2 2 2 A or ,1 2 2 1 A or ,1 A or 1 ese therefor , and 0 for 0 case, present In the 1 know we condition ion normalizat the From : box a in particle of ions Eigenfunct 2 2 0 0 2 0 2 0 2 2 0 2 - 2 = = = =  = = − − − =       − = − = =   = =            2 2 2 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 n 2 9 , 3 2 ) ( ,3 2 4 , 2 2 ) ( , 2 2 , 2 ) ( ,1 are ions eigenfunct few First function.
wave normalized the is This ....... 3 , 2 ,1 , 2 ) ( therefore are box a in particle of ions eigenfunct The ma E a x Sin a x n For ma E a x Sin a x n For ma E a x Sin a x n For n a x n Sin a x ASink x n               = = = = = = = = = = = = a x and 0 for x 0 a x 0 for V V(x) by d represente is a width of barrier potential A o   =   = 2 ) ( 2 2 ) 3 .....( 0 or, ) 2 ......( 0 )1 .....( 0 or, 0 2 0 ) ( 2 0 2 0 , : III Region 0 , 0 : II Region 0 ,0 :I Region 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 3 2 2 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 2 3 2 2 3 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 2 0 0 0       mE k E V m mE k k dx d dx d k dx d mE dx d V E m dx d mE dx d V a x V a x V x = − = = = + = − = + = + = − + = + =  =   =                boundaries at the continuous and finite are dx d and function wave that the condition boundary with the regions three in these solved is equation r Schrodinge III Region and II, Region I, Region into region l dimensiona one the divide We barrier pitential l dimensiona one for equation r Schrodinge the up Setting barrier.
the across go will particle y that the probabilit finite a is there mechanics, quantum to According barrier the across go not can particle the physics, classical to According V E is particle the of energy The left the from barrier potential on the incident is m mass of particle a consider We 0    Examples of Quantum mechanical Tunneling (i) Emission of a particle from radioactive nuclei: The a particle inside the nucleus is under neling.
simply tun or tunneling mechanical quantum called is phenomenon This barrier.
the of side other on the appear and barrier the through penetrate can V E th barrier wi on the left from incident particle a So fintite.
is III region in particle the finding of y probabilit that the shows which III, region in nonzero is function wave that the see we mechanics Quantum Using .
V height of barrier the penetrate not can V E energy of particle A y, Classicall III Region in ) ( II region in ) ( I Region in ) ( - are solutions the Therefore .0 So III.
Region in right from coming e matter wav any be not can there So, left.
from incident is particle the assumed But we left.
right to from going wave particle a represents III Region in ) ( II region in ) ( I Region in ) ( are (3) and (2), (1), Equation of solution general The 0 3 0 0 3 2 1 3 2 1   = + = + = = + = + = + = − − − − − −            ikx x x ikx ikx ikx ikx ikx x x ikx ikx Fe x De Ce x Be Ae x G Ge Ge Fe x De Ce x Be Ae x      +  + = = = = = = = − − = = = = = = = = 1 / 4 16 ......(6) / 4 16 T as ed approximat be can y probabilit ion transmiss The barrier, potential high and very wide a For T t coefficien ssion by transmi defined is barrier energy potential he through t particle a of ion transmiss of y probabilit The : t Coefficien on Transmissi ) 5 ......( dx d dx d and ) 4 .......( dx d dx d and .
and 0 boundaries at the continuous and finite be should dx d and that condition boundary the from determined are F and D, C, B, A, ts coefficien The 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 2 3 2 0 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 k e e k a x x a a a x a x a x a x x x x x                attractive nuclear force.
It is under a potential well.
The energy of the alpha particle is less than the potential well.
But the a particle comes out of the nucleus through tunneling.
(ii) Nuclear Fusion: Two light nuclei comes close to each other and undergo fusion.
The coulomb repulsion acts as a barrier as the particles come close to each other.
The particles can undergo fusion at lower energies because they tunnel through the coulomb barrier.
Devices developed using tunneling effect: Tunnel diode, Josephson Junction, Field emission devices, Scanning tunneling microscope etc.
Questions discussions Short Questions 1.
Mention two differences between classical physics and quantum physics.
2.
What is wave function in quantum physics?
Write its physical significance.
3.
Write the Schrodinger's time independent wave equation for a free particle moving along z- axis with low speed.
4.
Write the Schrodinger's time dependent wave equation for a particle moving along x- axis with low speed.
5.
State and explain the superposition principle for a wave function.
6.
What do you mean by normalization of wave function?
7.
What is probability density?
Derive an expression for it.
8.
Write the dimension of wave function of matter wave in 1-d, 2-d and 3-d. 9.
What do you mean by eigenfunctions of physical system?
10.
What do you mean by eigenvalues of physical quantity?
11.
Derive an expression for energy operator in quantum physics.
12.
Write the expression for energy and momentum operator in 3D.
13.
Derive an expression for momentum operator in quantum physics.
14.
What do you mean by expectation value of a physical quantity in quantum physics?
Write an expression for position expectation value.
15.
Prove that the momentum of a particle in a one-dimensional well of infinite height is quantized.
16.
Prove that the de-Broglie wavelength of a particle in an infinite deep potential well is quantized.
17.
A particle of mass 'm' is enclosed inside a potential well of infinite height.
Show that de-Broglie wave length of the particle in the first excited state is equal to the width of the well.
18.
A particle of mass 'm' is enclosed inside a potential well of infinite height.
Show that maximum de-Broglie wave length of the particle is twice the width of the well.
19.
A particle of mass 'm' is enclosed inside a potential well of infinite height.
Find the maximum de-Broglie wave length of the particle?
20.
If a particle trapped in infinitely deep potential well has de-Broglie's wavelength 'λ' in the ground state then what is its wavelength in the first excited state?
21.
Why the ground state energy of a free particle moving in a one dimensional potential box is non zero?
22.
What is the eigenfunction of a particle trapped in an infinite deep potential well in its second excited state?
23.
An electron confined in a one dimensional box of width L is known to be in its first excited state.
Determine the probability density of electron in the central half.
24.
Define a potential barrier.
25.
Write the potential function of a potential barrier of width 'a' and height V 0.
26.
What is quantum mechanical tunneling?
Give two examples of it.
Long Questions 1.
A particle of mass 'm' and energy 'E' is moving non-relativistically along X-axis, under the action of potential energy 'V'.
Develop the Schrodinger's time dependent wave equation for the particle.
Discuss the above equation for a free particle.
2.
What do you mean by wave function of a matter wave?
Write its important characteristics.
A particle trapped in a one-dimensional box of length L is described by the wave function Ψ = x. Normalize the wave function between a and b.
3.
(i) Define probability density.
What is the total probability of a system in different states?
(ii) The normalized wave function for certain particle is ψ(x)= 3/π cosx , in the region -π/2<x<π/2.
Calculate the probability of finding the particle in the region 0<x<π/4.
4.
Describe operators, eigen functions and igen values in relation to quantum mechanics.
Write down the expression for linear momentum operator and energy operator in quantum mechanics.
5.
Write the Schrodinger's equation for a particle confined in a one dimensional box of infinite height.
Show that the energy of the particle is quantized.
6.
Derive an expression for the normalized wave function of a particle trapped in an infinite deep potential well.
7.
Define a potential barrier?
Set up Schrodinger's time independent equation in different regions of a potential barrier, when energy of the incident particle is less than the height of the potential barrier.
Explain how quantum physics differs from classical physics in this problem.
8.
What is quantum mechanical tunneling?
Write some examples of it.
(ii) A beam of electrons are incident on a barrier of height 6.0 eV and 0.2 nm wide.
Find the energy they have, if 1.0% of them are tunnel through the barrier.
Numerical 1.
A particle can exist in the states ψ1, ψ2 and ψ3 with probabilities 1/2, 1/3 and 1/6 respectively.
Write the wave function of the particle.
If the energy eigen values in the three states are E1 = 2eV, E2 = 4 eV and E3 = 8 eV respectively, then find the expectation value of the energy of the particle.
2.
Calculate the probability of finding a particle in the region 2≤x≤4, if the wave function for the particle is given by ψ(x)=0.25 e2ix.
3.
The wave function for certain particle is Ψ = A cos2x for -π/2 < x < π/2.
Find the normalized wave function for the particle.
4.
Normalize the wave function in one-dimension ψ (x) = A e-α x , for x > 0 ψ (x) = A eα x, for x < 0 here, α is a positive constant.
5.
If the wave function of a quantum particle ψ(x) = √ 2 𝐿 sin 𝑛𝜋𝑥 𝐿., find the probability of the particle between x=0 and x= 𝐿 2 in the first excited state.
6.
A particle trapped in a one dimensional box of length 1 cm, is described by the normalized wave function ψ = x.
What is the expectation value of the particle's position < x >?
7.
A particle of mass m is trapped in a one-dimensional infinite potential well of length L is described the wave function ψ(x) = A sin 𝑛𝜋𝑥 𝐿. Normalize the wave function.
8.
Energy of an electron confined in a one dimensional potential box of 0.2 nm size is 151 eV.
What is the order of the state in which the electron exists?
h= 6.6 X 10 -34 Js.
9.
The ground state energy of a particle in an infinite one-dimensional potential well is 8 eV.
If the width of the well is halved, what is the new ground state energy?
10.
The ground state energy of a particle, trapped in a one-dimensional infinite potential well is 4 x 10-19 J.
Find the energy of the particle in second excited state.
11.
An electron is constrained to a one-dimensional potential box of 0.1nm side.
Find the energy eigenvalue for 2nd excited state.
12.
The energy of an electron in a one dimensional potential box of length 4 Å is 9.664 X 10-17 J.
Find the order of the state and the momentum of the electron in this state.
13.
If the energy in the second excited state of an electron trapped in a 1-D box is 77.4 eV, find the width of the box.
h= 6.6 X 10 -34 Js.
14.
An electron is trapped in a one-dimensional box (with perfectly rigid walls) of length 2 Å.
How much energy is required to excite the electron from the first excited state to the second excited state?
15.
The ground state energy of a particle, trapped in a one-dimensional infinite potential well is 3 x 10-19 J.
Find the energy of the particle in second excited state.
16.
Find out the energy gap between the 2nd and 3rd excited states of an electron confined in a potential box of length 4Å.
17.
1.2 million electrons with energy 3.0 eV are incident on a potential barrier of 9.0 eV high and 0.5 nm width.
How many electrons can tunnel through the barrier?
18.
A beam of electrons are incident on a barrier of height 6.0 eV and 0.2 nm wide.
Find the energy they should have if 1% of them are to tunnel through the barrier.
19.
Electrons with energy 3 eV are incident on a potential barrier of 10 eV high and 4 Å wide.
Find the transmission probability.
: LASER AND OPTICAL FIBER Introduction: The term laser is the acronym for Light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation The principle of laser was developed by the American physicist Charles Townes and, independently by Soviet physicist A Basov and N Prokhorov in 1950.
These three physicists shared the Novel Prize in 1964.
Here are the important steps that led to the discovery of the laser: 1887: Heinrich Hertz accidentally discovers the photoelectric effect.
This lucky breakthrough will allow Albert Einstein to introduce the notion of photons.
1901: The scientific conundrum known as "the ultraviolet catastrophe" (spectral energy densities diverge at high frequencies) is solved by Planck.
He hypothesises that the energy of a type of frequency ν is not a random continuous variable but a random discrete set of variables, represented by the values nh ν. Interestingly, Planck and his contemporaries at first find it very difficult to accept this idea of discrete leaps in energy.
However, subsequent experiments prove that the theory is entirely correct.
1905: Einstein introduces a means to quantify electromagnetic energy.
The photon is born.
Unfortunately, the arrival of the photon cannot take into account the phenomenon of black body radiation (the spectral density of electromagnetic energy emitted by an enclosed area at a temperature T and at thermal equilibrium).
However, shortly afterwards, Born devises a means to quantify the energy levels of electrons (1913).
This in turn allows Einstein to prove that photons and black body radiation are in fact compatible thanks to the notion of stimulated emission.
1949: Kastler and Brossel develop the first optical pumping and the first population inversion.
By 1950, the first MASERs appear (Microwave Amplification by Stimulated Emission Radiation), devices that are capable of amplifying an electromagnetic wave in the microwave region (Weber, Townes and Basov).
1954: The first MASER is built (an ammonia maser with a 13 mm wavelength).
The electromagnetic wave is confined in three dimensions by a "box" and is reflected off its sides.
However, this is still in the microwave rather than the optical domain.
In fact, scientists at the time thought it was impossible to make an optical laser because the cavity would have to be incredibly small (of the order of magnitude of a wavelength i.e.
only tens of μm at the most!).
1958: Schawlow and Townes decide to use an open Fabry-Pérot cavity for their experiments.
The idea is to confine the electromagnetic field like in a closed box but in only one dimension: the main axis of light propagation in the cavity.
This means that only certain specific electromagnetic waves are amplified, but the resulting beam is much more powerful than when using a closed cavity.
16th May 1960: Maiman demonstrates the first ever optical laser effect.
The amplifying medium is a ruby, the crystal most used in early lasers because it was already well known from its application in MASERs.
This is a pulsed operation laser with a wavelength of 694.3 nm.
1961: Javan, Bennet and Herriot build the first gas helium-neon laser operating continuously at 1.15 .
In fact, this laser can emit over a whole range of discrete wavelengths, from green to infrared via orange and red (633 nm).
1962: First red helium-neon laser.
1965: First semiconductor lasers.
1966: First coloured pulsed lasers (red, orange, yellow).
Light emission process (atomic transition/electronic transition): When an electron in an atom, transits (drops) from a high energy state to a lower energy state, the energy lost by electrons is emitted as a photon.
In a solid, when an electron drops from higher energy band to a lower energy band through a band gap, the energy lost by electron is emitted as a photon.
Light emission process involves (1) absorption of photons by electrons and transition to higher energy state (2) Transition of electron from higher to lower energy state and emission of the energy difference between two states as photons-this can happen in two ways - (a) Spontaneous emission without external disturbance/energy (b) Stimulated emission which occurs due to interaction of electrons in higher energy state with another external photon.
This type of emission happens in laser.
The details of the above mentioned processes are discussed below.
Stimulated Absorption: We consider a group of atoms of any material on which light is falling, i.e.
the material atoms are subjected to photon irradiation.
We also consider two energy levels in the atoms, one lower and one higher energy level.
The lower energy level E1 is occupied by electrons and the higher energy level E2 is empty.
We call the lower energy level ground state and higher energy level as excited state.
If the photon energy hν is equal to the energy difference (E2 - E1), then electrons can absorb the photon and go to higher energy state E2.
The transition of an electron from lower energy level E1 to higher energy level E2 by absorbing a photon of suitable energy (hν = E2 - E1), is called stimulated absorption.
After absorption of a photon by an electron of an atom, the atom is said to be in excited state.
The rate of stimulated absorption depends on population of electrons at the lower energy level, N 1 and the incident energy density.
atom+photon → atom* (atom in excited state) Spontaneous emission: The lifetime of electron in the higher energy level is very small ~10-8 second, on the average.
After this time, electron drops to lower energy state.
The energy lost by the electron (E2 - E1), is emitted as a photon having the same energy (hν = E2 - E1).
This is called spontaneous emission.
The rate of spontaneous emission depends on population of electrons at the higher energy level, N2.
Electron at the excited state E2 may drop to the ground state E1 spontaneously without any external radiation is called spontaneous emission The photons are emitted at different direction.
The excited atoms emit photons at different times.
So the emitted photons are incoherent.
Stimulated emission: We consider an electron in a higher energy level E2 level (excited state).
If photon of energy hν =E2-E1 is irradiated on an electron in higher energy then the electron may interact with the photon and drops to the ground state.
In this process, two photons are emitted.
This emission is called the stimulated emission or lasing action.
The rate of stimulated emission depends on population of electrons at the higher energy level, N2 and the incident energy density.
The process of emission of an electron from excited state E2 to ground state E1 by absorbing a photon of suitable energy (hν = E2-E1) is called stimulated emission.
In this process, two identical photons are emitted.
Characteristics of emitted photons: The photons are emitted in the same direction (direction of the incoming photon).
The photons are in phase: they are coherent.
photons are monochromatic ( frequency n=E2-E1/h) The three processes occur simultaneously when light is incident on the system.
At steady state, a balance is achieved between absorption and emission.
The process stimulated emission is of interest in lasers.
Electron distribution in a two state system and principle of laser: Let the total number of atom in the system be No.
According to Maxwell-Boltzmann Statistics, the number of atoms in state E1 (i.e.
electron in the atoms are in state E1) is N1 = No e (-E1/kT) ; k is Boltzmann constant and T is temperature Similarly, no.
of atoms in state E2 is N2 = Noe(-E2/kT) So, N2/N1 = e-(E2- E1)/kT ………..(1) We know E2 > E1, so we get from eq.
(1) : N2< N1 This means that the number of atoms in excited state is lower than the number of atoms in the ground state.
Thus number of electrons in excited state E2 is small and they have small life time (~10-8 sec) in the excited state.
They quickly drop to the ground state.
So, the probability of interaction of electrons in the excited state with incident photon, which is required for stimulated emission, is less.
Thus, spontaneous emission of photons is dominating process in general.
[If T<0 (not possible in reality) then N2>N1, that is why the situation of is called a -ve temperature state] To get laser emission, we need dominating stimulated emission of photons.
It requires two conditions: (i) larger number of electrons in the excited state (N2>N1) (ii) larger lifetime of electrons in the excited state.
The condition/situation of larger number of electrons being in the excited state compared to the ground state ((N2>N1) in a material is called population inversion.
The system in which population inversion is achieved is called an active system and the method by which population inversion is achieved is called pumping.
Special situation and techniques are necessary to create population inversion, where larger numbers of electrons are there in the excited state than the ground state.
This is achieved in a material/atomic arrangement where there are 3 or 4 energy levels with a metastable energy level or state, in which electrons have larger lifetime (10-3 sec) that any unstable excited state (lifetime ~10 -8 sec) .
Metastable states are the longer lived higher energy states where life time of an electron is ~ 10-3 seconds.
Pumping: The process of exciting electrons to higher energy state is called pumping.
This is done by supplying energy to electrons in a material from outside.
Methods of pumping: (i) Optical pumping: light energy is used for excitations.
Suppose in a system (atom), there are two energy states E1 and E2.
Light of suitable frequency (hν = E2-E1) is used to excite electrons from E1 to E2.
Example is ruby laser.
(ii) Electrical discharge pumping: Energy is supplied to electrons of a system by passing electrical discharge through it.
Example is gas laser like, He-Ne laser, CO2 laser etc.
(iii) Chemical pumping: Heat generated in exothermic reaction is used to excite electrons.
Three Energy Level systems for laser emission: A three level system consists of a ground state of energy E1, a high energy state of energy E3 and a metastable state of energy E2 in between E3 and E1.
Electrons are initially in the ground state.
During pumping photons of energy hν 13 = E3-E1 are irradiated.
Electrons absorb the photons and get excited to E3 level.
The lifetime of electrons in the excited level is ~10-8 second.
In this time, the electrons drop to the metastable state of energy E2 through non- radiative transition.
The energy of the electrons (E3-E2) is given to the crystal lattice.
The lifetime of electrons in the metastable state E2 is ~10-3 second, much higher than electron lifetime at E3.
By continuous pumping the metastable state is populated and the ground state E1 is depopulated.
So, population inversion occurs between the states E2 and E1.
A spontaneous emission of photon (hν = E2-E1 ) takes place by electron transition from E2 to E1.
The photon emitted by spontaneous transition interacts with on electron in state E2 and induce stimulated emission.
Two photons (hν = E2-E1) are emitted in this process.
These two photons further interact with other electrons in state E2 and four photons are emitted.
This process continues and a laser beam is produced.
Limitations of three level systems: (i) The laser is produced in pulsed manner.
When lasing transition takes place, E2 is depopulated and E1 is populated.
To achieve population inversion again, one need to wait for some time.
So, a material with three levels system emits pulsed laser.
(ii) It requires very high pumping energy, as the lower lasing transition level is ground state.
Four energy level system: The system is shown in the figure.
There are four states involved in laser emission process.
In between the ground state E1 and highest energy state E4, there are two states, a metastable state E3 and an intermediate state E2.
During pumping, photons (hν14 = E4-E1) are absorbed by the electrons in the ground state E1 and electrons go to state E4.
From E4, electrons drop to metastable state E3 through non-radiative transition.
The energy is given to the crystal lattice.
Thus, state E3 is populated and population inversion takes place between state E3 and E2.
*In the LHS of the fig, it is stimulated absorption, not spontaneous absorption (E1 to E3).
A spontaneous emission of photon (hν = E3-E2 ) takes place by electron transition from E3 to E2.
The photon emitted by spontaneous transition interacts with one electron in state E3 and induce stimulated emission.
Two photons (hν = E3-E2 ) are emitted in this process.
These two photons further interact with other electrons in state E3 and four photons are emitted.
This process continues and a laser beam is produced.
Electrons dropped to state E2 comes back to ground state E1 by radiative or non-radiative transition In this process, the state E3 remains populated and the state E2 remains depopulated.
So, a four level system emits continuous laser.
Here the lower laser transition level is not ground state.
Population inversion cannot be achieved in two energy level system hence no laser action.
According to Maxwell-Boltzmann Statistics, the number of atoms/electrons in state E1 is N1 = No e (-E1/kT) ; k is Boltzmann constant and T is temperature Similarly, no.
of atoms/electrons in state E2 is N2 = Noe(-E2/kT) So, N2/N1 = e-(E2- E1)/kT ………..(1) As E2 > E1, so we get from eq.
(1) : N2< N1 Hence population inversion is not achieved.
Characteristics of LASER: (i) A Laser beam is highly monochromatic (ii) It is Coherent (iii) Laser beam is unidirectional (iv) A laser beam is of high intensity Structure of Laser: Any laser consists of three essential parts: (i) Active material: in this material, populations' inversion is achieved and laser emission takes place.
Example: Ruby in solid state laser, He-Ne mixture in gas laser.
(ii) Excitation source for Pumping: Energy is supplied by a pumping method to the electrons in the active material for excitation of electron to a higher energy state.
(iii) A resonant cavity: It is the Laser Cavity consisting of an active medium bound between two mirrors.
The mirrors reflect the light to and fro through the active medium.
So more and more stimulated emission takes place by interaction of electron with light photons and laser Intensity increases.
Ruby laser: (Solid state laser, three energy level system) Construction: Ruby Laser consists of three parts (i) Active material: A rod of Ruby crystal (Al2O3 doped with 0.05 % of Cr).
Cr ions emit red color laser.
(ii) A resonant cavity is formed by two optical mirrors.
One is completely reflecting and the other is partially reflecting.
Two mirrors are attached to two ends of the ruby rod.
Laser is emitted through the partially reflecting mirror.
(iii) A Xe flash lamp is used as excitation source for pumping.
Working Principle The ruby rod is illuminated by an intense flash from the Xe lamp.
The impulse of light excites Cr ions from ground state to E1 to excited state E3.
Electrons in the state E3 are unstable (life time ~ 10-8 sec) and they quickly drop from E3 to a metastable state E2 by non-radiative transition.
The life time of electrons in E2 is longer (~ 10-3 sec), So population inversion is achieved between the states E2 and E1.
Laser transition takes place when electron drops from E2 and E1.
Emission Wavelength is 6943 A°.
Due to the presence of resonant cavity, laser radiation is intensified.
The radiation comes out from the partially reflecting mirror.
Limitations: same as 3 level laser system.
He-Ne Laser (Gas Laser: 4 level laser system) Construction: It consists of a long discharge tube of length 50 cm and diameter 1 cm.
The tube is filled with a mixture of He and Ne in the ratio 10:1.
Electrodes are provided to produce a discharge in the gas and they are connected to high voltage power supply.
The tube is sealed by inclined windows arranged at its end.
On the axis of tube two reflectors are fixed which forms resonator.
He atoms help to archive population inversion by imparting their energy to the neon atom.
Pumping is done by a DC electrical discharge in the low pressure gas in the tube.
The wavelength of the laser is 632.8 nm.
Working principle: He - Ne gas laser employ four level pumping schemes.
When the power is switched on the electric field ionizes some of the atoms in the mixture of He and Ne gases.
Due to electric field, the electrons and ions will be accelerated.
Since electrons have smaller mass they acquire higher velocity and He atoms are lighter in weight and therefore readily excitable.
The energetic electrons excite He atoms to excited states F2 and F3 which lies at 19 eV and 20 eV above the ground state.
These are metastable states for helium.
Though the radiative transitions are forbidden, the excited He atom can return to the ground state by transferring their energy to Ne atoms through collision.
Such an energy transfer can take place only when the two colliding atoms have identical energy states.
E6 and E4 level of Ne atom nearly coincides with F3 and F2 of Helium.
Ne atoms acquires energy and goes to excited state and helium atoms return to ground state by transferring their energy to Ne atoms.
This is main pumping mechanism.
Ne atoms are active centers and Helium plays the role of pumping agent.
The probability of energy transfer from Ne to He atom is less as there are 10 Helium atoms to 1 Neon atom.
E6 and E4 states are metastable states, as collision goes on neon atoms accumulate in these states whereas E5 and E3 level of neon are sparsely populated.
Therefore, a state of population inversion is achieved between E6 and E5, E6 and E3 and E4 and E3.
Consequently, three laser transitions take place.
E6-----E5 33900 A° (far IR region) E6-------E3 6328 A° (visible) E4----E3 11500 A° (IR region) As the terminal levels of lasing transitions are sparsely populated the fraction of Ne atom that must be excited to upper level can be much less.
As such the power required for pumping is low.
Random photons emitted spontaneously sets stimulated emission and coherent radiation is produced.
From E5 and E3 level neon atom can make downward transition to E2 level.
Incoherent light is emitted due to spontaneous transition.
As lower levels depopulate faster than upper levels it is easier to maintain population inversion throughout laser operation.
E2 is again a metastable state.
Therefore, Ne atoms tends to accumulate at this level again.
However, they are made to collide with the walls of discharge tube and they give up their energy and returns to ground state.
Role of Helium atoms: Being a good conductor of heat, He acts as a coolant and no separate cooling system is required.
He atoms being lighter than Ne atoms absorbs the energy from the high energy electrons easily and very fast.
The ratio He : Ne=10:1 makes the probability of energy transfer for He atoms to Ne atoms much higher than that of the reverse.
Merits: Continuous output laser source Highly stable No separate cooling is required Demerits: Low efficiency and low power output Gases are novel medium for laser as gases are found in the purest form so their optical properties are well defined.
Applications of Laser (i) Laser is used in industry for the purpose of cutting, drilling and welding (due to narrow angular spread and high intensity) (ii) Medical Science: microsurgery, treatment of retina, cancer treatment, laser angioplasty for clearing the blocked arteries, microsurgery (due to narrow angular spread).
(iii) Communication: micro-communication, large amount of data is transferred (iv) Hologram: 3D imaging, both phase and amplitude are considered (v) Distance measurement: LIDAR (light detection and ranging), distance between earth and moon can be measured by pulse echo technique (vi) Defense: Ranging and guiding weapons.
Also it is used as death ray (high antensity and highly directional) (vii) Computer and printers (laser diode is used).
Storage capacity for information in computer is improved due to narrow band width of laser light.
Laser printer (viii) Spectroscopy: Raman spectroscopy and Photoluminescence (ix) Environmental study, electronics etc Question discussion: 1.
How is laser different from ordinary light?
2.
Explain briefly the terms (i) stimulated emission (ii) spontaneous emission (iii) population inversion (iv) metastable state.
3.
What does the acronym LASER stand for?
4.
Write two important characteristics of it.
5.
Draw the population of atoms in different energy levels in atomic systems in equilibrium.
6.
Population Inversion is the necessary condition for lasing action.
Explain.
7.
What is population inversion?
Explain why population inversion cannot be achieved in two energy level system.
8.
What are the necessary and sufficient conditions for lasing action?
9.
Why is a narrow tube used in He-Ne laser?
10.
Why the end is faces of a ruby rod silvered?
11.
What is the function of He atoms in He-Ne laser?
12.
What is the function of Cr+3 ions in ruby laser?
13.
Write down the ratio of number of He atoms to number of Ne atoms in a typical He:Ne laser.
Why such a ratio is maintained?
14.
What is positive feedback in laser?
Why it is called optical feedback?
15.
Explain why a four-level laser is more efficient than a three-level laser.
16.
Explain briefly different uses to which laser beams are put.
17.
Explain construction and working of ruby laser with the help of a suitable energy level diagram.
Write its limitations.
18.
Explain the construction and working of He-Ne laser with the help of an energy level diagram.
Write its advantage over ruby laser.
19.
What does LASER stand for?
Write some characteristics of laser.
Describe the working of a three energy level Laser system.
Mention its limitations.
20.
Describe the components of a Laser system.
21.
(i) Distinguish between spontaneous emission and stimulated emission.
(ii) Why is population inversion referred to as a negative temperature state?
22.
Explain the working of a four-level laser system with a suitable energy level diagram.
23.
Draw a neat diagram to represent the component of a ruby laser.
Explain the operation.
Numerical 1.
A Ruby laser emits light of 693.95 nm wavelength.
If 1 mole of Cr+3 ions are involved in the lasing process, calculate the pulse energy in eV.
2.
If the lasing wavelength in Ruby laser is 694.3 nm, what the ratio of populations of the corresponding energy levels?
3.
Calculate the energy of the metastable state in a material where stimulated emission to an energy state at 0.25 eV causes emission of radiation of wavelength 1100 nm.
4.
If the wavelength of laser is 632.8 nm, then find the intensity of the laser if the power delivered is 103 Watt.
5.
A ruby laser has its metastable state at 1.79 eV from which stimulated emission produces laser light.
At room temperature when the population inversion is not achieved, calculate the ratio of population of the atoms in the metastable state to that in the ground state.
6.
In a material, transition occurs between a metastable state and an energy level of 0.45 eV and the wavelength of the radiation emitted is 2000 nm.
Calculate the energy of the metastable state.
7.
A laser beam of wavelength 7400Å has coherence time of 4 X 10-5 s. Determine the temporal coherence length.
8.
A ruby laser has its metastable state at 1.79 eV from which stimulated emission produces laser light.
Calculate the wavelength of laser light.
9.
The wavelength of a He-Ne laser generating 3.14 mW power is 632.8 nm.
What is the number of photons emitted per minute when it is in operation?
Optical Fiber Optical Fibers are thin fibers which act as waveguides to transport electromagnetic waves at optical frequencies over very long distance with very low loss of signal.
Transmission of data through optical fiber is called photonic devices (metallic wire is electronic devices) Structure Core: The core is the innermost part that is made out of glass or transparent plastic.
It is extremely thin, flexible, and has a cylindrical shape.
Its diameter ranges from 1-100 µm.
The core material has high refractive index.
Its sole purpose is to keep all the light within itself.
And also to guide the light in a direction parallel to its axis.
Since it is the primary carrier and guide of the light waves, it can be called an optical waveguide.
By the same token, its structure affects the transmission of the light.
Hence, all the data that is being transferred will have its transmission parameters or properties based on the structure of this segment of the fiber optic.
Cladding: It surrounds the core.
The diameter ranges from 100-300 µm.
It is also made of glass or transparent plastic.
But with a different material, so the refractive index of the cladding is lower than that of the core.
Coating/Jacket: Primary (plastic) and secondary (nylon) coating Principle of optical fiber: When light travels from a high refractive index (r.i) material to a low r.i material, the light rays can get completely reflected when angle of incident θ >θc, the critical angle of incidence.
The rays travel from one to another end of the optical fiber without much attenuation (loss) through multiple reflections.
Types of optical fibers Step index optical fiber: The refractive index of the core is constant.
The refractive index of the cladding is also constant but less than the core.
It cannot be used for long distance multimode transmission due to energy loss.
Graded Index optical fiber: The refractive index of the core is maximum along the axis of the optical fiber and gradually decreases towards the core/cladding interface.
Refractive index of the cladding is uniform.
It is used in long distance communication Difference between step index and graded index optical fiber Step index Graded index (i) Structure (written above) (ii) Schematic diagram (drawn above) (iii) Light follow zigzag path Light follow helical path (iv) Use in short distance communication Use in long distance communication (v) More dispersion of light rays Less dispersion Types of optical fiber based upon use: (i) Single mode (ii) multimode optical fiber Single mode optical fiber can carry only one electromagnetic field configuration (signal).
Multimode optical fibers can carry more than one electromagnetic field configuration (signal).
Single mode fiber Multimode fiber Properties: In single mode fiber only one mode can be propagate.
The single mode fiber has a smaller core diameter and difference in refractive index of core and cladding is small.
This fiber it allows large number of modes for light to pass through it.
Here, both the core and cladding in refractive indices difference is large as the core diameter is large Advantages: No dispersion (i.e.
there is no degradation of signal during propagation).
Since the information transmission capacity is inversely proportional to dispersion.
Disadvantages: Dispersion is more due to degradation of signal due to multimode.
Information can be carried to shorter distances only.
The fiber can carry information to longer distances.
Disadvantages: Launching of light and connecting two fibers are difficult.
Installation (fabrication) is difficult as it is more costly.
Advantages: Launching of light and also connecting two fibers is easy.
Fabrication is easy and the installation cost is low.
Single mode step index fiber: A single mode step index fiber consists of a very thin core of uniform refractive index (R.I) surrounded by Cladding of R.I lower than that of Core.
Since the core size is small the numerical aperture is also small.
They accept light from laser source.
They are used in long distance communications (telephony, TV broadcast systems).
Low/no dispersion possibility.
Product cost is high.
Multimode step index fiber: This is similar to single mode step index fiber with the exception that it has a larger core diameter.
The core diameter is very large as compared to wavelength of light transmitted.
The numerical aperture is large because of large core size.
They accept light from both laser as well as from LED.
They are used in data links, Local area network (LAN).
Dispersion possibility.
Product cost is low.
Graded index multimode fiber (GRIN fiber): In this type of optical fibers, R. I. of the Core varies with distance from the fiber axis.
It has high R.I. at center and R.I. falls rapidly as radial distance increases from the axis.
In GRIN fibers the acceptance angle and numerical aperture diminishes with radial distance.
They accept light from both laser as well as from LED.
They are used for medium distance communication for example telephone link between central offices in a small geographic area.
Numerical aperture: In order to understand the propagation of light through an optical fibre, consider the figure (2).
Consider a light ray (i) entering the core at a point A , travelling through the core until it reaches the core cladding boundary at point B.
As long as the light ray intersects the core- cladding boundary at a small angles, the ray will be reflected back in to the core to travel on to point C where the process of reflection is repeated .ie., total internal reflection takes place.
Total internal reflection occurs only when the angle of incidence is greater than the critical angle.
If a ray enters an optic fiber at a steep angle(ii), when this ray intersects the core- cladding boundary, the angle of intersection is too large.
So, reflection back in to the core does not take place and the light ray is lost in the cladding.
This means that to be guided through an optic fibre, a light ray must enter the core with an angle less than a particular angle called the acceptance angle of the fibre.
A ray which enters the fiber with an angle greater than the acceptance angle will be lost in the cladding.
Derivation of numerical aperture: Consider an optical fibre having a core of refractive index n1 and cladding of refractive index n2.
let the incident light makes an angle i with the core axis as shown in figure (3).
Then the light gets refracted at an angle θ and fall on the core-cladding interface at an angle where, ---------------------- (1) By Snell's law at the point of entrance of light in to the optical fiber we get, ------- ------------- (2) Where n0 is refractive index of medium outside the fiber.
For air n0 =1.
When light travels from core to cladding it moves from denser to rarer medium and so it may be totally reflected back to the core medium if θ' exceeds the critical angle θ'c.
The critical angle is that angle of incidence in denser medium (n1) for which angle of refraction become 90°.
Using Snell's laws at core cladding interface, or ----------------------- (3) Therefore, for light to be propagated within the core of optical fiber as guided wave, the angle of incidence at core-cladding interface should be greater than θ'c.
As i increases, θ increases and so θ' decreases.
Therefore, there is maximum value of angle of incidence beyond which, it does not propagate rather it is refracted in to cladding medium ( fig: 3(b)).
This maximum value of i say im is called maximum angle of acceptance and n0 sin im is termed as the numerical aperture (NA).
From equation(2), From equation (2) Therefore, The significance of NA is that light entering in the cone of semi vertical angle i m only propagate through the fibre.
The higher the value of im or NA more is the light collected for propagation in the fibre.
Numerical aperture is thus considered as a light gathering capacity of an optical fibre.
It is determined by acceptance angle im (It is the maximum angle for which incident ray undergo total internal reflection at the core-cladding interface and stays in the core of the optical fiber).
Numerical Aperture is defined as the sine of the acceptance angle of a waveguide or fiber (the Sine of half of the angle of fibre's light acceptance cone.
i.e.
NA= Sin θa where θa, is called acceptance cone angle) Source of Attenuation in optical fibers: (i) Energy absorbed in lattice vibration.
(ii) Energy absorbed by impurities.
(iii) Scattering of light due to local variation in refractive index.
Application of optical fiber: (i) Communication: High speed, high intensity and low loss data transmission.
(ii) Medical field: Diagnostic instruments- retinal treatment.
(iii) Industry: Laser is carried through optical fibers for cutting, drilling, and welding.
(iv) Fiber Optic Communication Link (FOCL): used to send signal over long distance.
Comprises of transmitter, fiber optic cable and receiver.
Fiber optics communication: Fiber-optic communication is a method of transmitting information from one place to another by sending pulses of infrared light[1] through an optical fiber.
The light forms an electromagnetic carrier wave that is modulated to carry information.
[2] Fiber is preferred over electrical cabling when high bandwidth, long distance, or immunity to electromagnetic interference are required.
This type of communication can transmit voice, video, and telemetry through local area networks, computer networks, or across long distances.
Figure shows the schematic diagram of a fiber optic communication system.
The major components of an optical fiber communication system are i.
The optical transmitter ii.
The optical fiber iii.
The optical receiver Principle: Basically, a fiber optic system converts an electrical signal to an infrared light signal.
This signal is transmitted through an optical fiber.
At the end of the optical fiber, it is reconverted into an electric signal Working: 1.
Encoder encodes the information in the binary sequence zeros and ones.
a. Encoder is an electric circuit where in the information is encoded into binary sequences of zeros and one.
In the light wave transmitter each 'one' corresponds to an electrical pulse and 'zero' corresponds to an absence of a pulse.
These electrical pulses are used to turn a light source on and off very rapidly.
The driver converts the incoming electrical signal into a form that will operate with the light source.
2.
These electrical pulses are used to turn a light source on and off rapidly.
3.
The optical fiber acts as a wave guide and transmits the optical pulses towards the receiver, by the principle of total internal reflection.
4.
The light detector receives the optical pulses and converts them into electrical pulses.
These signals are amplified by the amplifier.
5.
The amplified signals are decoded by the decoder.
Advantages of FOCL (Fiber optics communication link): (i) High information density (Fibre optic cabling provides a much higher bandwidth) (ii) Smaller in size, light weight and cheaper (iii) Much lower levels of signal attenuation or loss (iv) High speed data transmission (v) No leakage: secured communication( Fibre optics do not suffer from stray interference pickup that occurs with coaxial cabling) (vi) There is no short circuiting as in metal wires (vii) There is no need to ground and hence no voltage problem occurs.
(viii) It can withstand to any range of temperature and moisture condition Question Discussion: 1.
What is an optical fiber?
Sketch the different parts of an optical fiber.
2.
State the principle of an optical fiber.
3.
Why should clad glass have less refractive index than the core glass?
4.
Mention the role of cladding in an optical fiber.
5.
What is a step index optical fiber?
Draw the refractive index profile of it.
6.
What is a graded index optical fiber?
Draw the refractive index profile of it.
7.
Write down differences between step index optical fiber and graded index optical fiber.
8.
Write down the differences between single mode optical fiber and multimode optical fiber.
9.
Which of the optical fibers, among single mode and multimode optical fibers, is used for long distance communication and why?
10.
Draw the path of rays in the graded index optical fiber.
11.
Define numerical aperture of an optical fiber.
12.
What are the disadvantages of using fiber optic communication system?
13.
Mention the important applications of optical fiber.
14.
Schematically show the basic elements of FOCL.
15.
What is the principle of optical fibre?
Draw a neat ray diagram showing the principle of optical fiber.
Obtain an expression for critical angle of incidence at core-cladding interface in terms of their refractive indices.
16.
What are the advantages of using fibre optic communication system?
17.
What is numerical aperture of an optical fiber?
Derive an expression for numerical aperture of a step index optical fiber.
Numerical 1.
If the acceptance angle of an optical fiber is 68.160, find the numerical aperture.
If cladding has refractive index of 1.52, what is the refractive index of the core?
2.
What is the critical angle of a ray of light in a step index optical fiber for which refractive index of the core is 1.53 and that of cladding is 2.5 % less than that of the core.
3.
The refractive index of the core and cladding of a step index optical fibre are 1.52 and 1.41 respectively.
Calculate its critical angle, Numerical aperture and the acceptance angle.
4.
If the acceptance angle for a given fiber is 68.160, calculate the maximum entrance angle and numerical aperture.
If the cladding glass has a refractive index of 1.52, calculate the refractive index of the core glass.
5.
If the acceptance angle for a given fiber is 630, calculate the maximum entrance angle and numerical aperture.
DISCLAIMER: The courseware material prepared may contain some text, figures and diagrams taken from google images and other readily available web sources.
The contents are prepared for the use of students in Silicon Institute of Technology as additional reference material, and not for any commercial purpose.
FOREWORD This is the second iteration of preparing our own courseware material, after successful completion of a similar task undertaken a few years ago.
These contents have been carefully prepared and should serve as excellent auxiliary material for both instructors and students.
The Special Academic Group, Autonomy (SAGA) was formed for the sole purpose of preparing courseware contents primarily in the first-year theory subjects; a few second-year subjects were also included.
The subjects for the first year were - Basic Electrical Engineering, Basic Electronics Engineering, Computer Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms, Engineering Mathematics I and II, Engineering Physics, Engineering Chemistry, Constitution of India, Environmental Science and Engineering and Communicative and Technical English.
For the second year, the subjects for which courseware material was prepared were Analog Electronic Circuits, Digital Systems Design, Circuit Theory and Measurements and Instruments.
Faculty members from all the departments contributed to the task.
They were, in no particular order, Nalini Singh, Bimal Meher, Saumyaranjan Dash, Mukti Routray, Susmita Biswal, Manasa Dash, Bipin Tripathy, Sibasankar Nayak, Janmejay Senapati, Subrat Sahu, Pradeep Moharana, Rupambika Pattanaik, Dhananjay Tripathy, Jagadish Patra, Sachin Das, Deepak Ranjan Nayak, Amulya Roul, Bodhisattva Dash, Sanghamitra Das, Gyana Ranjan Biswal, Nibedita Swain and Rajan Mishra.
The entire group worked diligently to successfully complete the task which included a peer review of the material.
I take this opportunity to thank all the members of the SAGA group for a job well done.
I sincerely hope that this courseware material comes in handy and is utilized to the fullest extent.
These are readily available additional resources prepared in accordance with the Silicon autonomy syllabus, to complement textbooks and classroom lectures.
If there are any errors, I would be grateful if they are brought to my notice so that we can correct them in subsequent versions.
Dr. Jaideep Talukdar, Principal Silicon Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar December 2020 : ECOLOGY & BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYCLES Historically, Rachel Carson's 1962 book "Silent Spring" started wide-scale awareness in the 60s about the environment; she battled some large chemical corporations and created public knowledge and understanding of the fragility of ecosystems, and the environment in general.
Origin The word "Environment" has come from an old french word environ or environner to be exact which literally means "to encircle" or "to surround".
Definition The word "environment" can be defined as "our life support system which includes air, water, land/soil & all other natural resources present around us".
According to ISO:14001 (International Organization for Standardization), environment can be defined as, "Surroundings in which an organization operates, including air, water, land, natural resources, flora(plants), fauna(animals), human beings and interrelations".
Related Terms 1.
Environmental Science 2.
Environmental Engineering 3.
Environmental Management 4.
Environmental Laws 1.Environmental Science It is the study of human beings' impact on the environment and the physical, chemical and biological changes occurring in nature which focuses on pollution.
It is highly interdisciplinary & it collects information from various fields such as biology, chemistry, geography, agriculture, geology etc.
2.
Environmental Engineering It is defined as that branch of engineering which is concerned with protecting the environment from the potentially deleterious or harmful effects of human activities, protecting the human population from the effects of environmental pollution and improving the environmental quality for better human health & well-being.
3.
Environmental Management It consists of auditing of EIA (Environmental Impact Assessment), Planning, Preparing EIS (Environmental Impact Statement) & pollution management.
4.
Environmental Laws It involves the body of statuaries, policies those are made in order to protect the nature from being misused by human beings.
Some laws are regulative or controlling in nature while some are for preventive measure & some are binding on us.
Building Blocks of Environmental Engineering Sustainable Development (SD) It can be defined as "the ability to meet the needs of present generation without compromising the ability of future generation to meet their needs" i.e.
the balance or proper use of resources, so that our future generation will not face any problem for their survival, after taking care of our own survival needs.
Pillars or Components of SD There are three pillars or components of Sustainable Development (SD) i.e.
a) Economical Development b) Society or community Development c) Environmental Protection Human Dimension in Env.
Engg.
It is also known as Three factor model for assessing environmental degradation.
To estimate or assess the extent of environmental degradation John Holdern (a physicist) and Paul Ehrlich (a biologist) has given a three factor model.
According to this model, total environmental Impact (I) of degradation and pollution due to population in a given area depends on three factors i.e.
P, A, T. P represents Size of population A represents Affluence or Per capita Consumption or per person consumption T represents Technology used.
The relationship is, I = PAT In the developing countries, P3 syndrome i.e.
(Population, Pollution, Poverty) and in the rich developed countries overuse of natural resources are the key or important factors leading to environmental degradation.
Environmental Problems The major environmental problems that we are facing are - a) Water Pollution b) Air Pollution c) Biodiversity Depletion d) Large amount of Waste Production e) Food Supply Problems Causes of Environmental Problems Many Environmental Problems presently we are facing are mainly due to - a) Over Population b) Wasteful use of Resources c) Destruction & Degradation of Wildlife Habitats d) Depletion & Contamination of Surface Water & Ground Water e) Depletion of Non-Renewable resources or minerals f) Deforestation g) Soil Erosion h) Loss of Biodiversity Definition of Pollution It is an undesirable change in physical, chemical or biological characteristics of air, water & soil, that may harmfully affect human beings, animals, the plant life, industrial progress, living conditions & cultural assets.
Definition of Pollutant It is an undesirable harmful solid, liquid or gaseous substance present in such a concentration in the environment which tends to be injurious for the whole living organisms.
Ecological Concepts The word ecology was coined by Ernst Haeckel from two Greek words, Oikos & Logos.
Oikos means House or Living Space & Logos means Study.
Ecology is the branch of Biology concerned with the relations of various species to one another & to their physical surroundings Ecological Perspective Ecological perspective demands a greater understanding of the functioning of living systems & their interactions with the environment.
It gives a qualitative emphasis on ecological concepts.
Principles of ecology Living organisms can't exist with total disregard to their environment.
All living organisms & their physical environment are interdependent upon each other & also affect each other.
Every living organism has certain limits of tolerance towards the various factors of environment & only within these limits the organisms can survive.
The existence of life depends upon flow of energy through food chains & the cycling of nutrients.
Aspects of ecology The two important aspects of ecology are - a) Autecology or species ecology b) Synecology or community ecology a) Autecology It is concerned with the ecology of an individual species & it's population.
b) Synecology It is the study of communities, their composition, their behaviour & the relation to the environment.
Synecology is further subdivided into three categories - i) Population Ecology ii) Genetic Ecology iii) Taxonomic Ecology i) Population Ecology It relates with individual organisms with different groups of organisms within the ecosystem of different levels & the interrelationship among themselves.
ii) Genetic Ecology It is also known as Gene Ecology.
Different organisms have different genes and chromosomes; hence they live in different places.
The relationship due to the variation in genes among biotic components with their surroundings non-biotic environment is known as Genetic Ecology.
iii) Taxonomic Ecology It includes ecology of taxonomic groups such as microbes, vertebrates (with backbone), invertebrates (without backbone) & insects etc.
Ecosystem An ecosystem is defined as a natural functional ecological unit comprising of living organisms (i.e.
biotic community) & their non-living (i.e.
abiotic) environment that interact to form a stable self-supporting system.
Example: Pond ecosystem, Forest ecosystem etc.
The ecosystems are characterized by a diversity of species, but in an ecosystem there must be representatives from the three functional or metabolic groups such as Primary Producers, Consumers & Decomposers.
The ecosystems can vary in sizes.
Properties of Ecosystem An Ecosystem exists independent of specific components i.e.
an individual tree may die, but a forest persist.
The components of an ecosystem are interdependent.
The nature of ecosystem depends on the species biodiversity of the ecosystem.
The function of ecosystem depends on the energy flow & cycling of chemical elements within the ecosystems.
The ecosystem can be disturbed by human activities & the most adverse effect of disturbance is the loss of biodiversity.
Types of Ecosystem 1.
Natural Ecosystem 2.
Artificial or Man-made or Man-engineered Ecosystem 1.Natural Ecosystem These ecosystems operate by themselves under natural conditions.
Depending on the type of habitats, these are further sub-divided into - I) Terrestrial Ecosystem II) Aquatic Ecosystem I) Terrestrial Ecosystem It includes forest, grassland, desert ecosystems.
II) Aquatic Ecosystem These ecosystems found in the aquatic environment.
It can be divided into two categories - a) Fresh water ecosystem b) Marine water ecosystem a) Fresh water ecosystem The Fresh water ecosystem can be i) Lotic & ii) Lentic Lotic means (moving or running water) e.g.
River or Stream ecosystem Lentic means (Still or Standing water) e.g.
Pond, Lake ecosystem b) Marine water ecosystem These include salt water bodies which may be Ocean ecosystem, Sea ecosystem.
2.Artificial ecosystem These are maintained artificially by human beings.
e.g.
garden, park.
Structure or components of ecosystem Ecosystem has two major components.
1.
Abiotic & 2.
Biotic 1.
Abiotic can be classified into hydrosphere, atmosphere & lithosphere 2.
Biotic can be classified into producer, consumer & decomposer.
Consumer can be primary, secondary, tertiary consumers.
Functions of ecosystem Energy flow: It regulates the flow of energy from one level to the other.
Nutrient cycling: It regulates cycling of nutrients.
Environmental gradients: The ecosystem fix the limit of tolerance for each organism towards various factors of environment.
Food Chain & Food Web: The energy produced by green plants are passed to next levels by a chain of consumers leading to formation of food chain & interlinking of food chain will lead to formation of food web.
Biodiversity: The ecosystem regulates the species diversity to acquire a stable system.
Natural Resources The materials those occur in the environment or those are created by the environment & useful for supporting life or promoting the well-being of human beings are termed as natural resources Natural Resources are the naturally occurring substances those are considered valuable in their natural form & their value rest in the amount of material available & the demand for it.
Types of Natural Resources There are three types of natural resources - 1) Renewable or Inexhaustible i.e.
available in unlimited quantity.
Ex - Solar energy, wind power etc.
2) Non-renewable or exhaustible i.e.
available in limited quantity Ex - coal, petrol, diesel etc.
3) Abstract Natural Resources It includes animals, plants & natural landscapes as part of countryside used for recreation & tourism activities.
Ex - Bird watching, sight-seeing Value of environment The value of the environment is considered on the basis of the economic status of the particular region.
Natural resources existing in the region are the backbone on the economic status.
The following four points will help in evaluating the environment - 1.
Environmental Auditing 2.
Biodiversity 3.
Cost-Benefit Analysis 4.
Environmental Ethics 1.
Environmental Auditing Environmental Audit is defined as a systematic listing of natural resources in an area playing a key role for economic status & sustainable developments of mankind in that area following definite management & regulatory systems.
Generally, it provides a list of all the resources present in the area.
The audit activities are carried out in three phases - a) Pre-audit activities b) On-site audit activities c) Off-site or Post audit activities 1(a) Pre-audit activities It includes planning, scheduling the audit activities & selecting the audit team.
1(b) Onsite audit activities It includes interviewing of the site personnel & Inspecting the site.
1(c) Post audit activities It includes - Preparing & distributing audit reports Determining potential solutions Assigning responsibilities Implementing actions & Conducting follow-up of the action plan.
2.Biodiversity It doesn't imply just a collection of species, but is a basic resource which acts as a human life support system.
Biodiversity plays an important role in biogeochemical cycles.
Biodiversity has three hierarchical levels i.e.
i) Genetic Biodiversity ii) Species Biodiversity iii) Ecosystem Biodiversity There can be three kinds of losses of biological resources.
i) Depletion of a once common species ii) Local or global extinction iii) Ecosystem disruption.
3.
Cost-Benefit Analysis Working principles for Cost-Benefit Analysis include - i) The SMS approach SMS stands for Safe Minimum Standard ii) The Minimax rule Minimax stands for minimizing maximum losses i) The SMS approach It attempts to provide a decision-making process for problems involving long period of time & large uncertainties.
This approach makes conservation the preferred option.
ii) The Minimax rule It is a necessarily pessimistic decision rule biased towards conservation.
4.
Environmental Ethics It gives the attitude of people towards other living beings & the natural environment.
We, human beings must eradicate our feelings of superiority over the rest of natural world & develop an "I-Thou" relationship rather than "I-It" relationship with the environment.
Levels of organization in Biotic Components There are six major levels of ecological organization are recognized in the biotic components of the environment.
1) Individual 2) Population 3) Community 4) Ecosystem 5) Biomes & 6) Biosphere 1) Individual These are single species.
Individuals have physiological functions & respond to environmental conditions 2) Population Population consists of a group of individuals of the same species living in a particular area at the same time.
Birth rate, death rate plays an important role in the size of population.
3) Community Population of different species living together interact with each other to form a community.
Niche A suitable or comfortable position in the ecological hierarchy for a species.
Ex- Phytoplankton → Zooplankton→ Fish → Whale Niche of fish in the above ecological hierarchy is three or 3rd position.
4) Ecosystem It includes both biotic & abiotic components of an area.
The major or important feature of this ecological level is the strong interaction between the various biotic & abiotic components present.
Nutrient cycling & energy flow occur in this ecological level 5) Biomes When environmental conditions are similar in different parts of the country or around the globe, the habitats & communities are also often similar, giving rise to a higher level of biotic organization known as biomes.
Ex- a) Tropical Rainforest (High temp.& High rainfall) b) Desert Scrub (High temp.
& low rainfall) 6) Biosphere The highest organizational level is the biosphere & it extends from bottom of the sea to the top of the sky where life exists.
Biogeochemical cycles occur at this ecological level.
Ecosystem Process: In the ecosystem process, the following processes are essential for the survival & maintenance of biotic components.
1.
Energy flow & 2.
Nutrient cycling 1.
Energy flow On the earth, the ultimate source of energy for life is solar radiation.
There are two sources of energy - a) Autotrophic b) Heterotrophic 1.
(a) Autotrophic Autotrophic production of energy is carried out within the ecosystem by green plants in the presence of sunlight using photosynthesis process.
1.
(b) Heterotrophic Heterotrophic energy source is the one, where the chemical energy is imported as organic matter which is originated from primary production in some other ecosystem.
This imported organic matter is called allochthonous.
Photosynthesis 12H2O + 6CO2 + 709kcal (from sunlight)→ C6H12O6(Carbohydrate)+ 6O2 + 6H2O Out of total amount of solar radiation available, only 1 to 5% is used in the photosynthesis process.
The organic matter produced by green plants in the Photosynthesis process is called Primary Production or (PP).
PP is affected by various environmental factors like water, light, temperature & soil nutrients.
PP is of 2 types.
1) GPP (Gross Primary Production) 2) NPP (Net Primary Production) GPP - R(Respiration) = NPP GPP is the total amount of chemical energy or biomass stored by plants per unit area per unit time.
Since plant requires energy for synthesis of organic matter & functioning of plant itself, some of GPP is used in the process of respiration.
NPP is used for plant growth & reproduction.
NPP is normally 80 to 90% of GPP.
As various environmental factors affect PP, hence GPP & NPP vary over the globe.
NPP can be classified into four broad groups each with a characteristic productivity range.
1.
Low range - 0 to 250 gm/m2 - year Ex- Desert, semi-desert 2.
Middle range - 250 to 1000 gm/m2 - year Ex- Non-forest communities like shrubland, grassland 3.
Normal range - 1000 to 2000 gm/m2 - year Ex- Forest 4.
High range - 2000 to 3000 gm/m2 - year Ex- Rainforest Respiration When any organism requires energy, the reverse chemical reaction of photosynthesis occurs, known as respiration, where the glucose molecule is broken down in the presence of oxygen to produce CO2, H2O & energy for work done & maintenance.
The reaction is - C6H12O6+6O2→ 6CO2+6H20+ energy for work done & maintenance 2.
Nutrient cycling During decomposition, the complex organic molecules in the original detritus or waste are gradually broken down to much simpler constituents & inorganic molecules like nitrates & phosphates, as the material moves through the decomposer or detritus food chain.
These are then, enter into the soil or sediment or dissolved in water, where they become the nutrients available for reuse by green plants.
This whole process of recycling of nutrients within the ecosystem is known as nutrient cycling.
Overview of 2 major ecosystem process of energy flow, nutrient cycling Food Chain Chemical energy produced by primary producers & the nutrients used by plants to build plant tissues, are passed up by a chain of consumers leading to formation of food chain, where each link in the chain is provided with energy & nutrients.
Depending on the types of foods, there are three types of food chain available.
a) Predator or Grazing Food Chain b) Saprophytic or Detritus Food Chain c) Parasitic Food Chain a) Predator or Grazing Food Chain Predator means an animal that naturally preys on others.
Ex:- Sunlight→Grass→Grasshopper→Frog→Snake→ Hawk b) Saprophytic or Detritus Food Chain It starts from DOM (Dead Organic Matter) & goes to detritus feeding organisms i.e.
detrivores i.e.
bacteria, worms etc.
& on to their predators.
Ex:- Dead leaves→Soil mites→Insects→Lizard c) Parasitic Food Chain It is a food chain in which parasites live on the host body or within the host body to get energy.
This food chain also starts from the green plants & animals to parasitic microbes.
Food Web In most ecosystems, food chains interlink with each other to produce food web.
Food web shows the food pattern of energy flow in the ecosystem.
Tropic Level Tropic level or nutritional level or tier gives the feeding status of an organism in an ecosystem.
It is based on the concept who feeds on whom.
It can be - i)First tropic level or primary producer level Ex: - Green plants ii)Second tropic level or primary consumer level Ex: - Herbivores iii)Third tropic level or secondary consumer level Ex: - Carnivores Ecological pyramid The graphical representation of tropic levels is called the ecological pyramid.
The arrangement of organisms in a food chain according to tropic levels forms a pyramid.
Generally, pyramids are of three types.
1.
Pyramid of energy 2.
Pyramid of biomass 3.
Pyramid of numbers.
1.
Pyramid of energy Generally, 10% energy is transferred between adjacent tropic levels & rest 90% of energy is used up in that tropic level giving rise to energy pyramid.
This is called 10% rule of ecosystem.
It is based on rate of energy flow & productivity at each successive tropic level.
It decreases from autotrophs to higher tropic level.
2.
Pyramid of biomass It shows the total mass of the organisms in each tropic level.
It is based on total dry weight present in the level.
It decreases from autotrophs to higher tropic level.
3.
Pyramid of Numbers It shows the number of organisms in each tropic level.
There may be gradual decrease or increase in the number of individuals.
Standing Crop The amount of living materials in different tropic level or in any component population is known as standing crop.
It can be expressed as number/unit area or as biomass.
Ecological Succession In an ecosystem, new species may succeed older species.
The process of gradual change in the conditions of physical environment, leading to the change in the species structure of an ecological community (i.e.
replacement of one species by the other) over space & time, is called Ecological Succession or Ecological Development.
Biogeochemical Cycles Bio means living beings Geo means earth extended to air & water, where life exists.
Chemical means chemical elements which continuously move in the cycles.
The cyclic pathways through which chemical elements move from environment to the organisms & back to the environment are called bio-geochemical cycles.
All parts or components of different ecological systems, on a local or global scale are linked with the Biogeochemical Cycles.
Biogeochemical Cycles can have a number of phases & reservoirs.
1) Organic Phase 2) Inorganic Phase 1) Organic Phase In this phase, nutrients pass rapidly through biotic communities using food chain.
2) Inorganic Phase It contains all nutrient elements & are external to food chain.
The various sub-phases of the inorganic phase are - a) Sedimentary Phase b) Atmospheric Phase c) Aquatic Phase or Aquatic Reservoir a) Sedimentary Phase It involves interactions with the solid earth or rocks & results of geological activities such as weathering.
b) Atmospheric Phase It forms major part of some cycles like 'N' cycle & 'C' cycle & minor parts of some cycles like 'P' Cycle.
c) Aquatic Phase or Aquatic Reservoir It involves plant nutrients.
Types of biogeochemical cycles There are two types of biogeochemical cycles.
I) Air or Atmospheric Cycle.
II) Water or Hydrological Cycle I) Air or Atmospheric Cycle It can be classified into - i) C - Carbon ii) N - Nitrogen iii) O - Oxygen iv) P - Phosphorous v)S - Sulphur i) Carbon Cycle The carbon cycle is nature's way of reusing carbon atoms, which travel from the atmosphere into organisms in the earth and then back into the atmosphere over and over again.
Most carbon is stored in rocks and sediments, while the rest is stored in the ocean, atmosphere, and living organisms.
ii) Nitrogen Cycle Nitrogen Cycle is a biogeochemical process through which nitrogen is converted into many forms, consecutively passing from the atmosphere to the soil to organism and back into the atmosphere.
It involves several processes such as nitrogen fixation, nitrification, denitrification, decay and putrefaction.
iii) Oxygen Cycle The oxygen cycle is the cycle that helps move oxygen through the three main regions of the Earth, the Atmosphere, the Biosphere, and the Lithosphere.
The Atmosphere is of course the region of gases that lies above the earth's surface and it is one of the largest reservoirs of free oxygen on earth.
iv) Phosphorous Cycle Phosphorus moves in a cycle through rocks, water, soil and sediments and organisms.
Over time, rain and weathering cause rocks to release phosphate ions and other minerals.
This inorganic phosphate is then distributed in soils and water.
Plants take up inorganic phosphate from the soil.
v) Sulphur Cycle The sulphur cycle is the collection of processes by which sulphur moves between rocks, waterways and living systems.
Such biogeochemical cycles are important in geology because they affect many minerals.
II) Water or Hydrological Cycle The hydrological cycle of the earth is the sum total of all processes in which water moves from the land and ocean surface to the atmosphere and back in form of precipitation.
The hydrological cycle is dependent on various factors and is equally affected by oceans and land surfaces.
Interception:- It is the evaporation of water from the outer surface of leaves during & after rainfall.
Transpiration:- It is the evaporation of water through foliage.
Evapotranspiration:- It is the combination of Evaporation from water bodies & transpiration from leaves.
: WATER & WASTEWATER TREATMENT Physical Properties of Water The various physical properties of water that shows wide variation in magnitude includes - Colour Turbidity Taste & odour Temperature Solids Colour It is measured in Hazen's Scale.
The permissible limit of colour for drinking water is 5mg/L or ppm.
Turbidity It is the measure of cloudiness in water & caused by presence of suspended matter which scatters & absorbs light.
It is measured in NTU (Nephelometric Turbidity Unit).
The Permissible limit of turbidity for drinking water is 1NTU.
Taste & Odour This may be due to presence of micro-organisms, algae, dissolved minerals, salts etc.
It is measured in TON (Threshold Odour Number).
The permissible limit of TON for drinking water is 1 to 3.
TON = (A + B)/ A A - Volume of Sample with odour B -Volume of Pure Water with no odour Added If A was a 100 ml sample and 100 ml of water had to be added to not detect the odour - the TON would be 2.
TON = (100 + 100)/ 100=200/100=2.
Temperature The temperature of water varies with atmospheric temperature & it is a significant parameter regarding characteristics of water.
For drinking water, the temperature should be 10-250C.
Solids Solids content of water represents the characteristics of water.
Solids present in water can be studied as follows- a) Total Solids (TS) b) Suspended Solids (SS) c) Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) = TS - SS d) Total Volatile Solids (TVS) e) Volatile Suspended Solids (VSS) f) Filterable Solids (FS) & Non-Filterable Solids (NFS) NFS = SS (Particle Size Range is 100 to 10-3 mm) FS can be Colloidal (Particle Size Range is 10-3 to 10-6 mm) & Dissolved (Particle Size Range is 10-6 to 10-9 mm) Chemical Properties of Water It can be Inorganic & Organic Inorganic Chemical properties of water includes PH Alkalinity & Acidity Hardness Conductivity Organic Chemical properties of water includes BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand) TOC (Total Organic Carbon) TOD (Total Oxygen Demand) Inorganic Chemical properties of water PH PH is Potential of Hydrogen or Power of Hydrogen PH = - log [H+] or = - log [H3O+] PH range for public water supplies is 6.5 to 8.5.
Q.
In a water treatment plant, the PH values of incoming & outgoing water are 7.2 & 8.4 respectively.
Assuming a linear variation of PH with time, determine the average P H value of water.
Alkalinity & Acidity Alkalinity is also known as ANC or (Acid Neutralizing Capacity) & Acidity is also known as BNC or (Base Neutralizing Capacity) Alkalinity can be of three types.
a) Carbonate Alkalinity b) Bicarbonate Alkalinity & c) Hydroxide Alkalinity Hardness Hard water has high mineral content.
Hardness of water are of two types.
a) Temporary Hardness or Carbonate Hardness b) Permanent Hardness or Non-Carbonate Hardness a) Temporary Hardness It is due to carbonate & bicarbonate of Ca+2 & Mg+2.
b) Permanent Hardness It is due to Chloride & Sulphate of Ca+2 & Mg+2.
Hardness of water is expressed in mg/L as CaCO3.
The permissible limit of hardness of drinking water is 200 mg/L as CaCO3.
Hardness in mg/L as CaCO3 = [M+2(concentration in mg/L) X 50]/ [equivalent weight of M+2] = M+2(Concentration in meq/L) X 50 Q.
Determine the various hardness of the following water sample.
Constituent Concentration (in mg/L) Ca+2 60 Mg+2 29.3 HCO3- 366 Conductivity or Electrical Coductivity It is the measure of the ability of an aqueous solution to carry an electric current.
The equation can be, ec= ƩCifi where, ec is electrical conductivity in μs(siemens)/cm, Ci is concentration of ionic species in solution in mg/L & fi is conductivity factor for ionic species.
Organic Chemical properties of water BOD5 = 0.6 COD CBOD or Carbonaceous BOD = 0.92 COD Q.
Determine COD & TOC for glucose(C6H12O6)?
Q.
If bacteria cells are represented by the chemical formula C5H7O2N, then determine the potential carbonaceous BOD, when bacteria cell concentration is 1000mg/L.
Q.
A wastewater is analysed & is shown to contain 100 mg/L of ethylene glycol (C2H6O2) & 120 mg/L of phenol(C6H6O).
Determine COD & TOC.
Organic Content Parameter of Water When an organic waste is discharged to a stream, the organic content of the effluent or discharge undergoes a biochemical reaction with the help of micro-organisms.
BOD = P(DOI-DOF) Where, P is Dilution Ratio, DOI & DOF are initial & final DO (Dissolved Oxygen) concentration Corrected BOD = P[(DOI-DOF)-f(BI-BF)] Where, f is the correction factor or seeding factor=1-(1/P), BI & BF are initial & final DO (Dissolved Oxygen) concentration of seeded diluted water or Blank Q.
The results from a BOD test diluted by 100 are given below.
Calculate the BODS.
Time (in days) DO(in mg/L) 0 7.95 1 3.75 2 3.45 3 2.75 4 2.15 5 1.80 Q.
The results from a BOD test diluted by 100 are given below.
Calculate the Corrected BODS.
Time (in days) DO(in mg/L) Blank DO(in mg/L) 0 7.95 8.15 1 3.75 8.10 2 3.45 8.05 3 2.75 8.00 4 2.15 7.95 5 1.80 7.90 The rate of decomposition of organic matter is directly proportional to the amount of organic matter available & it is a first order reaction.
i.e.
d/dt(Lt)α Lt => d/dt(Lt) = -k1xLt => d(Lt)/Lt= k1xdt Where, Lt is BOD remaining in mg/L=BODr & K1 is deoxygenation rate coefficient Now taking integration of both sides and putting initial condition at t=0, Lt=L0, we will have final expression for BOD exerted at any time t i.e.
BODt= L0(1-e-k1t) Q.
If K1 or deoxygenation rate coefficient is 0.15 per day, then determine the ultimate BOD or BODu or L0.
Temperature effect on K1 Temperature has an effect on K1 & is given by, KT = (K20)x(Ɵ)(T-20) Where, KT= The deoxygenation rate coefficient at T0C K20=The deoxygenation rate coefficient at 200C Ɵ = Coefficient= 1.047 for 200C< T < 300C & = 1.35 for 40C < T < 200C NBOD The Oxygen demand associated with the oxidation of ammonia (NH3) to nitrate (NO3-) is called Nitrogenous BOD or NBOD.
2NH3 + 3O2→2NO2- + 2H+ + 2H2O 2NO2- + O2 → 2NO3- So 2NH3 + 4O2 → 2NO3- + 2H+ + 2H2O Finally, NH3 + 2O2 → NO3- + H+ + H2O Q.
Determine the TOD (Total Oxygen Demand) if the sample contains 25 mg/L of N. BOD remaining (BODr) graph BOD exerted (BODt) graph CBOD & NBOD relationship Q.
15ml of sample was diluted in 300ml bottle.
Initial DO was 8.9 mg/L & final DO after 5days was 4.4mg/L.
The corresponding initial & final DO of diluted water was 9.1mg/L & 9.05 mg/L.
Find out 5 days BOD at 200C.
Q. BOD of an sample incubated for one day at 300C was found to be 100mg/L.
What would be the 5 day BOD at 200C.
The deoxygenation rate coefficient (K1) is 0.12 at 200C.
Q.
Determine the two day BOD for a wastewater at 200C, while BOD5 at 200C is 250mg/L.
The deoxygenation rate coefficient(K1) value at 200C is 0.2 per day.
What shall be the BOD after the end of seven days at 250C .
Q.
A BOD test was conducted taking 5% wastewater mixed with 95% aerated water for dilution & the following observations were found out: i) DO of the aerated water used for dilution is 3.6 mg/L ii) DO of the original wastewater sample is 0.8 mg/L iii) DO of the diluted wastewater after incubation at 200C for 5 days is 0.7 mg/L Calculate the 5 days BOD of the above wastewater sample if the deoxygenation constant is 0.11.
Aquatic Pollution The aquatic Pollution can be classified into three broad groups.
a) Fresh water pollution or Surface water pollution b) Estuarine pollution c) Marine pollution a) Fresh water pollution The pollution of fresh water can be caused by:- Wastes from municipality & industries Oil from industry wastes & cleaning of vehicles Thermal waste from industries & power stations Heavy metals etc.
b) Estuarine pollution Estuarine means tidal mouth of river or where river mixes with the sea.
So if surface water is polluted then it can lead to pollution of estuarine.
c) Marine pollution The main pollutants for Marine pollution are:- i) Manmade organic poisons like Pesticides & herbicides ii) Radioactivity due to radioactive substances.
Point & Non-Point Sources of Pollution Point Sources are those, which discharge pollutants from specific locations such as chimney, drainpipe of factories etc.
Point Sources are easier to monitor & regulate.
Non-point sources of pollution are those, which don't have any specific location of discharge.
As a result, these are difficult to monitor & regulate.
Ex:- Run-off from paddy fields, Lawns & Gardens.
Oxygen Sag Curve The longitudinal profile of Oxygen concentration is Known as Oxygen sag curve.
Eutrophication It can be defined as the enrichment of water by inorganic plant nutrients like N & P, which results in increase in primary productivity.
Artificial eutrophication is known as cultural eutrophication which is caused by adding fertilizers.
The problems arising due to Eutrophication are:- Water quality may have unacceptable taste & odour Water may be injurious to health The household usefulness of water may decrease.
Oxygen transfer in waterbodies The oxygen transfer in waterbodies is given by Orlob equation i.e.
{(Cg-C0)/(Cg-Ct)} = ek2t Where, Cg = Saturation Concentration of oxygen C0 = Initial Concentration of oxygen Ct = Concentration of oxygen after time 't' K2 = reaeration rate constant Q.
If saturation concentration of oxygen in water is 9.2mg/L & the initial concentration of oxygen is 2.1mg/L, then determine the time it takes to become 7.5mg/L, having K2 value 0.25 per day.
What is the time required for Ct to be 5,6,7,8,9 mg/L.
Ground water Quality/Contamination The simplest model of decay of a contaminant is to assume the decay to be a first order reaction i.e.
r = - kc & Ct = C0e-Kt Where, Ct = Concentration at time 't' in mg/L C0 = Initial Concentration in mg/L t = time in days K = first order decay coefficient Q.
Determine the concentration of a contaminant at the downstream well, if the upstream concentration is 80mg/L.
Assume decay constant (k) to be 10-4 per day & time (t) = 274 years Ground Water Recharge It is also known as deep percolation.
It is a hydrologic process, where water moves downward from surface to ground.
Recharge can occur both naturally & artificially.
Natural way of recharge is occurred through hydrological cycle.
Recharge occurs artificially, when rainwater, reclaimed water or recycled water is injected or routed to the subsurface.
Recharge can help move excess salts that accumulate in the root zone to deeper soil layers or into the deep groundwater system.
Ground Water Flow The ground water flow is governed by Darcy's law which can be expressed as follows:- Q = KiA = KA(dh/dL) = KA{(h2-h1)/(L2-L1)} Where, Q = horizontal flow in m3/sec K = hydraulic conductivity in m/sec i = dh/dL= hydraulic gradient A = cross sectional area in square mtr h2- h1= water head drop L2-L1 = Length difference over which water head drop occurs q = Q/A = Specific discharge or discharge per unit area Q.
Determine the daily flow capacity and transmissivity of an aquifer, if it's height, width, length are 15mtr, 800mtr & 2km respectively.
The water head change over the length 2km is 3mtr.
The hydraulic conductivity (K) is 6x10-7 m/sec.
Water Table A water table is the underground depth, at which point the ground is totally saturated by water.
The water table may vary due to seasonal changes in precipitation, evapotranspiration & topography etc.
Aquifer An aquifer is a body of saturated rock through which water can easily move.
An aquifer is an underground layer of water bearing permeable rock from which ground water can be extracted using a water well.
Aquifer can be of two types- a) Unconfined aquifer b) Confined aquifer a) Unconfined aquifer An unconfined aquifer is the one which is open to receive water from the ground surface & whose water table surface is free to fluctuate up & down, depending on the recharge & discharge rate.
These are extremely susceptible to contamination.
b) Confined aquifer These types of aquifers have rock layer with less permeability or confining bed of rock above them due to which water can't enter freely into these type of aquifers from the ground surface.
These are less susceptible to contamination.
Concept of Hydrology i) Water Balance or Water Budget ii) Hyetograph & Hydrograph iii)Rainfall-Runoff Relationship or Rational formula for determining runoff i)Water Balance or Water Budget It gives the quantitative account of hydrological cycle.
The equation for water balance is based on conservation of mass.
The water balance equation is P= R+E+∆S+∆G Where, P is Precipitation R is Runoff E is Evaporation ∆S is change in soil moisture status ∆G is change in ground water status ii) Hyetograph & Hydrograph Hyetograph represents rainfall intensity vs time.
Hydrograph represents runoff or stream discharge vs time.
If time is unit i.e.
1hr., then hydrograph will be unit hydrograph.
iii)Rainfall-Runoff Relationship or Rational formula for determining runoff Q = CIA Where, Q is runoff in m3/sec C is locality coefficient I is Rainfall Intensity in mm/hr A is Catchment Area in square KM Peak Discharge (QP)or Peak Run-off It can be expressed as follows- QP = 0.278 CIA Modified Rational Formula given by Wallingford is- QP = 0.278CVCRIA Where, CV is volumetric runoff coefficient & CR is Routing Coefficient Water Treatment The objectives of water treatment are- A) To produce Water which is safe for human consumption B) To produce Water at a reasonable cost C) To reduce water impurities to acceptable levels Organoleptic Parameters Organoleptic Parameters are those parameters which can be sensed or felt by human organs.
Ex:- Colour, Taste & Odour etc.
Classes of Water treatment Class Descripition Source A No Treatment Borehole water B Disinfection only Borehole water C Standard water Treatment River,Reservoir D Advanced/Special water Industrial Water Treatment Monitoring Frequency The water quality parameters are required to be monitored depending on the source & quality of raw water.
The three categories are- A) Minimum monitoring(C1) B) Current monitoring(C2) C) Periodic Monitoring(C3) Water Treatment Processes The treatment processes of water can be classified into three stages- A) Pretreatment processes B) Standard or Conventional processes C) Special or Advanced processes A) Pretreatment processes Some treatment processes are required prior to standard water treatment processes which may include- i) Screening ii) Storage iii) Aeration iv) Chemical pre-treatment i) Screening:- Different types of screens are used in this process.
Those are can be- a) Coarse Screen b) Fine Screen c) Micro Screen a) Coarse Screen:- These screens contain typically inclined bars of 25mm dia & 100mm spacing, preventing large floating matters from entering the treatment plant b) Fine Screen:- If storage is not provided, then fine screens are fitted after the coarse screens.
If there is storage, then fine screens are placed at the outlet of the storage tanks.
Fine screens are typically mesh with openings about 6mm dia or square C) Micro Screen:- In micro screens, mesh openings range from 20 to 40 µm.These type of screens are used only for relatively uncontaminated water.
ii) Storage:- Storage tanks balance the flows going to the treatment plant.
Storage capacity should be equivalent to 7 to 10 days of the average water demand.
The period of storage shouldn't be long, so as not to encourage the growth of unwanted organisms iii) Aeration:- Aeration is the supply of oxygen from the atmosphere to water to effect beneficial changes in the quality of water.
It is a common treatment process for groundwater Aeration is generally used for the followings- a) To release excess H2S gas which may cause undesirable taste & odour.
b) To release excess CO2 which may have corrosive properties c) To increase oxygen content of water.
iv) Chemical pre-treatment:- The chemical pre-treatment to remove undesirable properties of water like algae or excess colour is a more expensive process than chemical post-treatment.
In pre-treatment, greater amount of chemicals are required to effect the same result as some of the chemicals are absorbed by turbidity of water.
The two Chemical pre-treatment processes which are generally used are- a) Pre-Chlorination b) Activated Carbon a) Pre-chlorination:- It is used on low turbidity water with a high coliform count.
The chlorine is injected into the water stream & it oxidizes & precipitates iron & manganese.
It also kill pathogens & reduces colour.
The chlorine dose used is 5mg/L.
Pre-chlorination also reduces NH3 in both surface water & ground water supplies.
b) Activated Carbon:- The activated Carbon is used for- i) Removal of Photosynthetic Algae ii) Improvement of colour & odour iii) Removal of organic compounds Activated Carbon can be used either as PAC (Powdered Activated Carbon) or as GAC (Granular Activated Carbon).
Generally for water treatment PAC is used, but GAC is used where taste & odour of water have an industrial base.
PAC has lower cost & efficiency than GAC.
Doses may vary from 3 to 20 mg/L.
B) Standard or Conventional processes It includes- i) Sedimentation ii) Coagulation iii) Flocculation iv) Filtration & V) Disinfection i) Sedimentation The heavier large particles settle down by the force of gravity at the bottom of the sedimentation tank, which is called Sedimentation.
Stoke's law for settling velocity is the deciding force for sedimentation.
Stoke's law can be represented by- VS=(g/18µ)(ρs- ρw)d2 Where, VS is settling velocity g is acceleration due to gravity µ is dynamic viscocity d is dia of settling particle ρs is density of particle settling ρw is density of water ii) Coagulation The lighter smaller particles don't settle down by the force of gravity.
To make them settle down, some amount of coagulants are added to the water, which is called Coagulation.
Some examples of coagulants are- Alum i.e.
aluminium sulphate Ferric Chloride Ferric Sulphate Ferrous Sulphate iii) Flocculation When coagulants are added to the water, the lighter smaller particles coagulate or combine with each other forming bigger particles, known as floc & the process is called flocculation.
iv) Filtration It is the process of passing water through a porous medium, with the expectation that the filtrate water has better quality than the incoming water.
Generally, two types of filters are used a)Rapid gravity filter:- Here rate of filtration is high i.e.
5 to 20m/hr.
b) Slow sand filter:- Here rate of filtration is slow i.e.
0.1 to 0.2m/hr.
V) Disinfection By disinfection, pathogens & micro-organisms are killed, thereby making water more pure.
The requirements of a good disinfectant are- a) It should be toxic to micro-organisms.
b) It should have a fast rate of kill.
c) It should be persistent enough to prevent regrowth of organisms in the distribution system.
d) It shouldn't produce undesirable compounds.
e) It should be safe to handle.
f) It should be of reasonable cost.
Chick's law The rate of destruction of micro-organisms is often a first order chemical reaction as given by Chick's law i.e.
( ) 0 ( ) ( ) ( ) , t t t t kt t d d N N N k N dt dt So N N e  −  = − = Where, Nt = Number of organisms at time 't' N0 = Number of organisms at time 't'= 0 K = Rate constant depends on types of micro-organisms present & types of disinfectants used The various examples of disinfectants are- a) Chlorine dioxide b) Chlorination c) Chloramines d) UV radiation Chlorine demand & Breakpoint Chlorination When chlorine is added to water, the chlorine at first oxidizes inorganic compounds & some amount of chlorine will be consumed by organic matter present in water.
Then some amount of chlorine will be used for formation & subsequent destruction of chloramines.
The amount of chlorine required to fulfill the above consumption requirements are called chlorine demand.
The point at which the chlorine demand is satisfied is called the breakpoint chlorination.
The excess dose of chlorine after breakpoint, is available for disinfection which appears as residual chlorine.
A residual chlorine of minimum 0.5mg/L is maintained in disinfection practices.
C) Special or Advanced processes The purposes of advanced water treatment processes are- i) To take water treated by standard water treatment processes & to improve it to an exceptionally high-quality water as often required by particular industries like food industry & pharmaceuticals etc.
ii) To treat water containing specific chemical or microbiological contaminants, so that they can be brought to an acceptable standard.
Wastewater Treatment Introduction Generation of wastewater is based on our water consumption rate, which is increasing & the way we use water.
As undesirable contaminants are likely to be present in the wastewater, it can contaminate or degrade our surface water or ground water resources, hence it should be properly treated before releasing to the water bodies or environment.
Types of wastewater a) Domestic/Sanitary wastewater b) Industrial wastewater c) Agricultural wastewater d) Storm/Runoff water Common Terms Sewage- It refers to domestic / sanitary wastewater.
Sewer- It refers to pipes carrying sewage.
Sewerage- It refers to sewer network systems.
FOG- It refers to Fat, Oil & Grease, which are basically immiscible layer in the wastewater.
Wastewater Treatment Processes a) Pre-treatment b) Primary treatment c) Secondary or Biological treatment a) Pre-treatment Pre-treatment of municipal wastewater is required to make it useful for further treatment & to decrease overall load on the system.
It includes Screening, Grit Channels, Oil & Grease removal, Chemical pre-treatment etc.
b) Primary treatment It basically removes suspended solids (SS) from the wastewater.
Sometimes, it also removes some organic solids along with inorganic suspended solids.
It includes sedimentation, coagulation etc.
The removal efficiency w.r.t.
SS is 50-70% and w.r.t.
removal of BOD is 25- 40%.
c) Secondary or Biological treatment It can be divided into two major categories, depending on the availability of oxygen.
i) Aerobic Process i.e.
it occurs in presence of oxygen & ii) Anaerobic Process i.e.
it occurs in absence of oxygen.
i) Aerobic Process Aerobic Processes like Trickling Filter, RBC (Rotating Biological Contactor) & ASP (Activated Sludge Process) etc.
ii) Anaerobic Process Anaerobic process has three major steps like Hydrolysis, Acidogenesis or Fermentation & Methanogenesis.
Aerobic vs Anaerobic Process In aerobic process, molecular oxygen present which is absent in case of anaerobic process.
In aerobic process, stable oxidized end products like CO2 & H2O are generated, but in case of anaerobic process stable reduced end products like CH4 & NH3 are generated.
In aerobic no byproduct recovery, but in anaerobic by product methane gas is useful.
In aerobic appreciable microbial growth occurs, but in anaerobic no appreciable growth of microbes.
In aerobic less skilled operation & in anaerobic more skilled/stringent operation is required.
In aerobic low capital cost but high operating cost & in anaerobic high capital investment but low operating cost.
Aerobic process is suitable for low BOD wastewater like sewage while anaerobic process is suitable for high BOD wastewater/ sludge coming from sugar mills and other agrochemical operations.
ASP (Activated Sludge Process) It is an excellent method of treating either raw sewage or more generally the settled sewage.
The sewage discharged from the primary sedimentation tank, which is normally used in this process, is mixed with 20 to 30% of activated sludge, which contains a large concentration of highly active aerobic micro-organisms, which increases the rate of decomposition.
The ASP unit basically consists of CSTR (Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor), which is an aeration basin equipped with surface aerators and secondary clarifier unit.
The aerobic bacteria culture is developed in the reactor and remain in suspension.
Monod Model Monod Kinetics is used for microbial growth calculations and reactor sizing in the activated sludge process.
The pertinent equations are rg = dX/dt =μ X= [μmax {S /(Ks + S)}]X , where the terms have the usual meanings.
S, substrate Conc, X, microbe conc.
The diagram below shows how Ks is determined from μmax .
Monod's equation is an empirical equation to determine rg , the growth rate of microbes.
Wastewater treatment flow diagram Reactor Configuration In environmental engineering, particularly in water & waste water treatment reactors used are of 3 types - i) Batch Reactor (BR) ii) Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) iii) Plug Flow Reactor (PFR) i) Batch Reactor (BR) In this case, the reactants or inputs enter into the reactor, remain for desired time & then discharged.
Ex:- BOD test ii) Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) In this case, reactants continuously enter into the reactor & the products are continuously discharged from a well-mixed vessel.
Ex:- Waste water treatment iii) Plug Flow Reactor (PFR) In this case, the reactants or inputs are entered at one end & products are discharged at the other end, after spending a minimum retention time in the system.
Ex:- mixing of pollutant in river flow : ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY, SOIL CHEMISTRY, GROUND WATER RECHARGE, NOISE SOURCE & ABATEMENT Soil Chemistry The order of 10 most abundant elements in soil & crustal rocks are - In soil: O > Si > Al > Fe > C > Ca > K > Na > Mg > Ti In Crustal rock: O > Si > Al > Fe > Ca > Mg = Na > K > Ti > P Soil minerals The most common soil minerals are - Quartz - SiO2 Calcite - CaCO3 Gypsum - CaSO4.2H2O Gibbsite - Al(OH)3 Soil Salinity A soil solution is considered saline, if the electrical conductivity (EC) is greater than 4000 micro-siemens/cm or µs/cm.
This condition occurs, when evaporation exceeds precipitation.
If this condition continues then, saltpan will occur.
General Composition of soil 1)Inorganic or Mineral matter-45% (Ca,Mg etc.)
2) Organic matter - 5% (Humus) 3) Soil water - 25% 4) Soil air - 25% Types of soil in India 1.
Red soil 2.
Black soil 3.
Mountainous soil 4.
Desert soil 5.
Alluvial soil (fine grained fertile soil present in river bed) Elemental properties of soil in relation to infiltration 1.
Bulk Density or Dry Density (ρb) = Md/Vt = Dry mass of soil/Total volume of soil 2.
Particle Density(ρm) = Md/Vd = Dry mass of soil/Dry volume of soil 3.
Porosity(φ)= (Va+Vw)/Vs = (Volume of air + Volume of water)/Volume of soil 4.
The water content (ϴ) = Vw/Vs = Volume of water/ Volume of soil 5.
Degree of saturation(s): - It is a measure of wetness.
So, S = Vw/(Va+Vw) = (Vw/Vs)/[(Va+Vw)]/Vs = ϴ/ φ Soil Moisture Deficit (SMD) The Soil Moisture Deficit is the term used when soil moisture is below the Field Capacity (FC) of soil.
Field Capacity (FC) It is the maximum % of volumetric soil moisture that a soil sample will hold freely against earth gravity.
It varies from 5% for sandy soil to 30% for dry soil.
Atmospheric Chemistry Primary Pollutant The Primary Pollutants are those which are emitted by identifiable manmade sources.
Ex:- SOX, NOX,CO Secondary Pollutant The secondary pollutants are those formed in the atmosphere by chemical or photochemical reactions of primary pollutants.
Ex:- Acid rain, Photochemical Smog Photochemical smog It is basically the product of HC(Hydrocarbon) + NOx + Sunlight PAN PAN is a class of compounds, Peroxy- Acyl- Nitrates, that are formed by photochemical reactions at the ground level.
It is a key ingredient of SMOG, is a respiratory inhibitor and an eye irritant.
The commonest PAN is Peroxy-Acetyl- Nitrate.
The reactions involving PAN formation are complex, and not totally well understood.
However, the equations below give a rough pathway to the photochemical formation of PAN compounds.
PANs are secondary pollutants which are present in photochemical smog.
PANs are not directly emitted as exhaust from power plants or internal combustion engines, but they are formed from other pollutants by chemical reactions in the atmosphere.
Free radical reactions catalyzed by UV light from the sun oxidize unburned hydrocarbons to aldehydes, ketones & dicarbonyl compounds whose secondary reactions create peroxyacyl (the most common is the peroxyacetyl) radicals, which combine with the NO2 radical to form Peroxyacylnitrates (PANs); if the radical is peroxyacetyl, then peroxyacetylnitrate (PAN) is formed.
The reactions involved, in a simplified manner, are as follows: NO2 + hv -------> NO + O O + O2 ---------> O3 O3 + NO --------> NO2 + O2 When the nascent oxygen combines with hydrocarbon (i.e.
HC or RC), then acyl radicals, RCO, are formed: RC + O ----------> RCO Then these acyl radicals combine with oxygen molecule to form peroxy-acyl radicals RCO + O2 -----> RCO3 and finally, peroxy-acyl radicals RCO3 combine with NO2 to form RCO3NO2.
RCO3 + NO2 ----------> RCO3NO2 , a peroxy-acyl nitrate If R is CH3 (methyl group) then, CH3COOONO2 or C2H3NO5 (peroxy-acetyl nitrate) is formed, which is called PAN.
Vertical Temperature Profile of earth's atmospheric Region There are basically four regions are there.
Troposphere - 0-12 km Stratosphere - 12-50 km Mesosphere - 50-80 km Thermosphere - 80-700 km The Troposphere is mostly heated by transfer of energy from the earth surface and temperature decreases with altitude or height.
In Stratosphere temperature increases with height due to increased absorption of UV radiation by Ozone Layer.
In Mesosphere temperature decreases with height due to decreasing solar heating.
In Thermosphere temperature increases with height due to absorption of highly energetic solar radiation which causes atmosphere particles in this layer to become electrically charged.
Criteria Pollutants The criteria pollutants as defined by USA, EC(European Community) & WHO includes CO,NO2,SO2,Pb,PM-10(Particulate Matter of dia less than 10µm).
These are generally found in urban environment.
Non-Criteria Pollutants The non-criteria air pollutants are those for which emission limits from industry are set or fixed.
These are more poisonous & hazardous w.r.t.
criteria pollutants.
Ex:- Benzene(C6H6),Carbon disulphide(CS2), Arsenic, Asbestos Acid Deposition Normal clean rain has a pH value of between 5.0 and 5.5, which is slightly acidic.
However, when rain combines with sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides which are produced from power plants and automobiles the rain becomes much more acidic.
Typical acid rain has a pH value of 4.0.
Hydrocarbon (HC), SOX, NOX emitted from industries & vehicles are the main source of acid deposition on the earth.
GHG (Green House Gases) A GHG absorbs & emits radiation within the thermal infrared range having wavelength between 700nm to 1mm i.e.700x10-9 m to 10-3m.
The major GHG in order of their contribution are CO2>CFCs>CH4>N2O(Nitrous Oxide) Air Pollution Meteorology The meteorological factors are - Wind speed & direction Temperature & humidity Turbulence Atmospheric Stability Topographic effects on meteorology Scales Air pollution emission can be measured in 3 scales- a) Microscale b) Mesoscale c) Macroscale a) Microscale It is of the order of 1km & duration is minutes to hours.
Ex:- Chimney gases b) Mesoscale It is of the order of 100km & duration is hours to days.
Ex:- Mountain valley wind c) Macroscale It is of the order of 1000km & duration is days to weeks.
Ex:- wind over oceans & continents Wind Speed Wind speed at any height(z) can be determined using power law relationship i.e.
UZ=U10(Z/Z10)P Where, UZ is wind speed at height Z mtr U10 is wind speed at 10mtr height Z is height in mtr Z10 is 10 mtr height P is exponent depends on terrain & stability class Q.
Use power law velocity profile equation to determine U20,U50,U100,U200 if U10 is 5m/sec & p is 0.2.
Lapse Rate In the lower troposphere, the temperature usually decreases with altitude.
The rate of temperature change or gradient is known as the lapse rate.
Lapse rate can be ambient or adiabatic.
Ambient Lapse Rate (ALR) or Environmental Lapse Rate (ELR) The temperature change or gradient with respect to rising altitude is known as ambient lapse rate & it varies from day to day & day to night.
This is the actual change of temperature with altitude for the stationary atmosphere.
Adiabatic Lapse Rate The temperature change of a parcel of air against rising altitude under adiabatic condition (i.e.
occurring without the addition or loss of heat) is called the adiabatic lapse rate.
Adiabatic Lapse Rate can be of two types- i) Dry Adiabatic Lapse Rate(DALR) ii) Moist adiabatic lapse rate (MALR) or Saturated adiabatic lapse rate(SALR) For dry air i.e.
DALR value is 0.980C per 100mtr or approximately 10C per 100mtr or 100C per KM height.
For moist air i.e.
MALR value is 0.550C per 100mtr or approximately 0.60C per 100mtr or 60C per KM height.
Pasquill - Gifford stability classes Atmospheric Dispersion For determining atmospheric dispersion, generally 5 models are used like - Gaussian model Numerical model Statistical model Emperical model Physical model Out of the above models, Gaussian model is generally used.
The various assumptions of Gaussian model are - i) There is no variation in wind speed & direction between the source & receptor.
ii) All discharges remain in the atmosphere.
iii) Dispersion doesn't occur in the downward direction.
iv) Emission rates are assumed constant & continuous.
Equipment Selection & Design The Equipment Selection & Design is made on the basis of the types of compounds which are required to be removed.
Generally, compounds can be of three types - a) Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) b) Inorganic Compounds c) Particulate matter The major types of equipments which are used are - i) Incinerators ii) Absorbers iii) Adsorbers iv) Condensors v) Filters vi) Scrubbers or wet collectors- It is an apparatus using water or solution for purifying gases or vapours vii) Various particle collection devices like ESP (Electrostatic Precipitator) viii) Impingement separators- By density difference, it separates solids from gases ESP (Electrostatic Precipitator) An electrostatic precipitator (ESP) is a highly efficient filtration device that removes fine particles, like dust and smoke, from a flowing gas using the force of an induced electrostatic charge minimally impeding the flow of gases through the unit.
Basic Working Principle of ESP In high- voltage electrostatic field, affected by the electric field force, gas ionization takes place.
There are tremendous amount of electrons and ions existing in the ionized gas.
After the dust particles are combined with these electrons and ions, they will be polarized, most of them are negatively polarized.
Under the action of the field force, negatively charged particles migrates towards the positive electrode and in turn release electrons and attach to the positive electrode.
When the particles agglomerate and the layers reach a certain thickness on the plate, rapping system will start to work and the particles will be dislodged from the collecting plate by vibration and falling into the hopper.
That ends the collection process.
The efficiency of an ESP with plate collector is given by Anderson-Deutsch equation which can be expressed as follows- Efficiency = 1- e(-AW/Q) where, A = area of the plates in square mtr W= particle sedimentation velocity in an electric field in mtr/sec Q= Gas flow rate in m3/sec Q.
A quantity of 50 m3/sec of air flows from a cement manufacturing facility.
It contains cement particles whose settling velocity is 0.12 mtr/sec.
If 99% removal efficiency is required, calculate the surface area of the ESP or design an ESP.
Q.
Calculate the percentage increase in area of the ESP plates, if the efficiency of the ESP unit is to be increased from 99% to 99.7%.
Given the flow rate is 50m3/sec & particulate velocity is 0.15mtr/sec.
Q.
The drift velocity of fly ash particle is given by the empirical equation w= 1.5X105 dp, where dp is particle size.
Determine the plate area required to remove particles of dia 0.7µm with removal efficiency 95%.
Flow to ESP is 5m3/sec.
Noise Pollution Sounds are mechanical waves of pressure which allow us to hear & listen.
Sounds can be transmitted through solid, liquid & gas.
Generally human beings can perceive sound frequencies between 20 Hz & 20 KHz.
Noise is a sound, that is loud, unpleasant, unexpected or undesired.
Sounds, particularly loud ones, that disturb people or make it difficult to hear wanted sounds, are called noise.
Noise is a subset of sound.
Sources of Noise Pollution Sources can be classified into outside & inside.
Outside include construction sites, road traffic, airport, factories etc.
Inside include phones, tv, radio, home appliances etc.
Main source is urbanization & increasing population Source Sound in dB Normal conversation 60 Alarm Clock 80 Car horn 120 Jet 130 Gunshot 140 Rocket Launching 180 Effects of Noise Pollution Sleep disturbance Lack of productivity Causes stress & depression Hormone imbalance Higher heart rate Noise Control or Attenuation Noise has following medium.
Source→Transmission Path →Receiver The acoustic treatment of above three can help in attenuation.
Ways to reduce Noise Pollution Wear ear plugs Avoid using multiple appliances at a time Keep vehicles & machines in proper condition Buildings can be designed with suitable noise absorbing material for the walls, windows, and ceilings.
Social awareness programs should be taken up to educate the public about the causes and effects of noise pollution.
Physical Properties of Sound The various physical properties of sound are - Amplitude(A)- Amplitude is maximum or minimum pressure.
Wavelength(λ)- Wavelength is the distance between successive crest or trough.
Time Period (T or P)- Time period is the time gap between successive crest or trough Frequency(f)- Frequency is the number of complete pressure variations or cycles per second.
Speed of sound(c)- Speed of sound is 340m/sec.
Noise Criteria The various noise criteria can be - LAeq (Equivalent Continuous Level) LAE (Sound Exposure Level) LAN (Sound Level Exceeded for N% of time) Indian Standard for ambient noise level Area code Area Daytime Nighttime A Industrial Area 75dB 70dB B Commercial Area 65dB 55dB C Residential Area 55dB 45dB D Silence Zone 50dB 40dB The above values are of LAeq.
Inverse Square Law of sound Propagation It states that, the sound intensity(I) is inversely proportional to the square of the distance (r) it propagates.
I = W/4πr2 i.e.
I α 1/r2, where, W is Sound power of noise source in watt.
The sound power level is measured in decibel(dB) i.e.
LW=10 log(W/10-12) where, LW is sound power level in dB for 10-12 watt & W is sound power of noise source in watt.
The sound pressure level is measured in decibel(dB) & is directly proportional to the square of sound pressure i.e.
LP=10log{P2/(P0)2} = 20 log (P/P0) Where, LP is sound pressure level in dB, P is measured pressure in Pascal & P0 is reference pressure = 20μPa Q.
The sound from a voice shouting source is 0.001W.
What is the sound power level?
Q.If a sound source has a pressure of 2000μPa at 10mtr distance, calculate a) Sound Pressure Level in dB b) Sound Intensity in Watt/m2 c) Sound Power in Watt.
Q.If two sound sources have equal pressure of 2000μPa, then determine the sound pressure in dB.
Q.
An air conditioner generates a noise level of 75dB for five minutes in every hour.
If the background noise level is 55dB, then calculate the LAeq.
: SOLID WASTE, HAZARDOUS WASTE & E-WASTE MANAGEMENT Solid Waste Management Solid waste is the unwanted or useless solid materials generated from combined residential, industrial and commercial activities in a given area.
Management of solid waste reduces or eliminates adverse impacts on the environment and human health and supports economic development and improved quality of life.
It may be categorised according to its origin (domestic, industrial, commercial, construction or institutional); according to its contents (organic materials like plastics, rubber, food items & inorganic materials like glass, metal etc); or according to hazard potential (toxic, non-toxic, flammable, radioactive, infectious etc).
A number of processes are involved in effectively managing waste for a municipality.
These include monitoring, collection, transport, processing, recycling and disposal.
The order or hierarchy of solid waste management includes - i) Waste prevention & minimization ii) Reuse & Recycling iii) Transformation iv) Landfill Reuse A newly purchased product is put to another use after the first use is completed.
Recycling It is the processing of used materials or waste into new products to prevent waste of potentially useful materials.
Properties of MSW (Municipal Solid Waste) The various properties of MSW includes - i) Physical Properties of MSW ii) Biological Properties of MSW iii) Chemical & Energy Properties of MSW i) Physical Properties of MSW The various Physical Properties of MSW are - a) Particle Size Distribution b) Density & Moisture Content c) Field Capacity d) Shear Strength e) Hydraulic Conductivity a) Particle Size Distribution Particle size is measured in terms of size of screens in mm through which wastes are passing.
This distribution will provide the information of various materials present.
b) Density & Moisture Content Density is mass per unit volume, which is a useful physical parameter used for separating various wastes from each other before treatment.
The moisture content is expressed as mass of water vapour per unit mass of substance.
Moisture Content (%) = {(a-b)/a}X100 Where, 'a' is initial mass of sample & 'b' is mass of sample after drying c) Field Capacity (FC) It is the maximum percentage of volumetric soil moisture that a MSW sample will hold freely against earth's gravity.
FC can be calculated by - FC = 0.6 - 0.55{W/(4500+W)} Where, W is overburden weight in Kg.
d) Shear Strength Solid wastes when compacted usually have high shearing strength & hence don't flow on standing, but sludge has poor shearing strength & therefore very often sludge is co-disposed with MSW.
e) Hydraulic Conductivity Sludge in landfills tend to resist the movement of water through them due to low hydraulic conductivity, as sludge has high moisture content.
ii) Biological Properties of MSW Organic or biological matter in MSW is significant for the energy recovery by biodegradation.
Biodegradation can be accomplished either by aerobic or anaerobic process.
The biodegradability of the organic fraction of MSW is given by - BF = 0.83 - 0.028LC Where, BF is Biodegradable Fraction LC is Lignin(organic) Content in % of dry weight High LC will give low biodegradability.
iii) Chemical & Energy Properties of MSW The various steps involved in this are - a) Proximate Analysis b) Ultimate Analysis c) Energy Content a) Proximate Analysis It deals with the determination of moisture content(W%), volatile matter(VM%), non- combustible fraction (i.e.
ash%) & Fixed Carbon(FC).
FC can be found out by - FC=100 - W(%) - VM(%) - ash(%) FC is the solid combustible residue that remains after the material is heated & the volatile matter is ejected.
b) Ultimate Analysis It is the elemental analysis of essential major elements like C,H,O,N,P,S in percentage mass.
c) Energy Content Heating value or calorific value of MSW may be defined as the amount of heat liberated in calorie, when a gram of MSW is burnt.
It gives the amount of organic matter present in the MSW.
Generally, terms like E, Hu, Hwf, Hawf are used to express energy content.
E is Energy Content Hu is LHV(Lower Heat Value) i.e.
energy received from waste as collected from site Hwf is NHV(Normal Heat Value) i.e.
energy received from water-free waste Hawf is HHV(Higher Heat Value) i.e.
energy received from ash-water-free waste Hu = Hawf x B - 2.445 x W Where, B is flammable fraction or combustible component W is moisture content fraction or water content The energy content of MSW can be determined from following equations - i) Dulong Equation ii) Khan Equation i) Dulong Equation Hawf =337(C )+1419{(H)-0.125(O)} +93(S) +23(N) Where, C, H, O, S, N are the % by weight of each element present in the material.
ii) Khan Equation E= 0.051{F + 3.6(CP)} + 0.352(PLR) Where, E = Energy content, F = % of food material by weight CP = % of Cardboard & Paper by weight PLR = % of Plastic & Rubber by weight Separation of MSW The different major components of MSW must be separated from one & the other in order to have suitable management of MSW.
The component separation can be done at the household or at the industry i.e.
at the source or at the transfer station or at the final destination, where mechanical sorting or separation is possible.
Storage & Transport of MSW It depends on types of collection facility available & materials present, which can be - i) Door Step Collection ii) Regular Roadside Collection iii) Dustbins at market places iv) Community Recycle bin Integrated Waste Management The ideal integrated waste management plan might have following priorities - i) Minimize all components of waste fraction.
ii) Recycle paper, cardboard, non-ferrous metals.
iii) Reuse plastics, ferrous metals, glass.
iv) Compost food fraction of MSW.
v) Incinerate the remaining food waste.
vi) Landfill the remaining after proper treatment.
Land fill vs Open Dump A Sanitary Landfill is a carefully engineered tract of land, designed by engineers.
The system consists of a large excavated area in the ground, with a thick lining of plastic over which there is a compacted clay liner.
The bottom of the pit also has a liner that helps in preventing the liquid waste (that comes out from the solid waste mostly if rainwater is soaked in the landfill) from leaking through, as it could contaminate the water supply.
This liquid waste that gets collected is called leachate.
The compacted garbage (or refuse) is then added to the landfill in the form of organized layers (layers of garbage alternating with layers of soil).
This is done for the elimination of any unpleasant odors and to expedite the rotting or decomposition process.
When the landfill is fully covered, it is further sealed by a layer of compacted clay.
Moreover, a gas (methane) is often produced as the waste deteriorates due to which a system is required to collect and pump it.
If this is not managed effectively, the methane gas can explode.
The methane collected can be utilized to generate electricity.
In most Western Countries, there are different types of landfills, mainly depending on the nature of waste materials.
A landfill is built for each of the garbage types like household waste, hazardous chemicals or radioactive waste, construction waste, etc.
An open dump, as the name suggests, is an open area typically outside city limits where the garbage is dumped; this usually results in very unhygienic conditions and often pollutes the groundwater nearby, from toxic chemicals leaching into the groundwater.
Leachate in Landfills Leachate is the contaminated water in landfills which arrive at the landfill site through external precipitation.
The amount of leachate produced in a landfill depends on it's water balance, which can be expressed as follows - LC = PR + SRT - SRO - EP - ST Where, LC is Leachate, PR is Precipitation SRT is Surface Run To i.e.
water outside the site entering the landfill SRO is Surface Run-off EP is Evapotranspiraton ST is Change in water storage Q.
Calculate the Landfill area requirement for 20 years for a city of population of about 5 lakhs.
Assume MSW generation as 500gm per capita per day & density of MSW is 500kg/m3.
Hazardous Waste Management Hazardous waste is defined as, any waste which because of it's physical, chemical quality, quantity and infectious characteristics can cause significant hazards to human health or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed.
A substance is hazardous, if it exhibits one or more of the following characteristics.
i) Ignitable:- The substance causes or enhances fire.
ii) Reactive:- The substance reacts with other materials & may explode.
iii) Corrosive:- The substance destroys tissues or metals.
iv) Toxic:- The substance is a danger to health, water, food & air.
Hazardous Category Nature of Waste H1 Explosive H2 Oxidiser H3A Highly Flammable H3B Flammable H4 Irritant H5 Harmful Generation of Hazardous Waste Industry Type Hazardous Substances Battery Cd, Pb, Ag, Zn Electroplating Co,Cr,Cu,Zn Printing As,Cr, Cu,Pb,Se Textiles Cr, Cu, Organics Medical Hazardous Wastes These are the wastes generated from hospitals, medical colleges, nursing homes, clinical laboratories & operation theatres etc.
Medical hazardous wastes include - i) Expired or Obsolete medicines ii) Infectious dressing materials iii) Pathological wastes from medical laboratories & operation theatres iv) Wastes from dental clinics etc.
Household Hazardous Waste The household hazardous wastes come from kitchen, bathroom, garage, garden etc.
It may include - i)Used or Exhausted batteries ii)Chemicals like dyes, perfumes iii)Pesticides, herbicides, used oils, lubricants etc.
Transportation of Hazardous Waste The data or information required for Transportation of Hazardous Waste are - i) Waste Generator ii) Composition of Waste iii) Physical Appearance iv) Method of Packaging v) ADR/RID classification ADR means transport of dangerous goods by road RID means transport of dangerous goods by rail vi) UN Number(United Nation Number) ADR/RID classification Class Item Description 1a Explosive Items 1b Items loaded with explosives 1c Detonators & similar types of goods 2 Gases, Compressed, Condensed or dissolved under pressure 3 Flammable Liquids UN Number (United Nation Number) The UN numbers range from UN0001 to about UN3500 and are assigned by the United Nations Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods.
UN Number Hazardous Item 1001 Acetylene Dissolved 1002 Compressed Air 1003 Liquefied air, refrigerated 1005 NH3, dry, liquefied Treatment of Hazardous waste i) Thermal Treatment (Incineration) ii) Chemical Treatment (Neutralization) iii) Physical Treatment (Filtration, Flocculation) iv) Disposal (Secure Landfill) Incineration Incineration can be defined as controlled high temperature oxidation of primarily organic compounds to produce CO2 & H2O with non-objectionable by-products.
3 T's of Incineration i) Time ii) Temperature iii) Turbulence i) Time Adequate residence time for solids for complete destruction or breaking of bonds.
It depends on feed rate, incinerator dimension & rotation speed.
ii) Temperature High enough temperature is required for destruction of hazardous waste.
iii) Turbulence Sufficient turbulence with adequate air or oxygen for mixing of waste with oxygen.
This depends on rotation speed & incinerator types.
Types of Incinerator i) Rotary Kiln ii) Liquid injection iii) Plasma Arc Destruction iv) Wet Air Oxidation V) Fluidized Bed Combustion i) Rotary Kiln This is most common type of incinerator.
Here Chemical destruction of waste occurs.
ii) Liquid injection This is for treating liquid organic waste.
iii) Plasma Arc Destruction In this case, electric arc of very high temperature is used.
iv) Wet Air Oxidation It is an aqueous phase oxidation where materials are exposed to gaseous source of oxygen.
v) Fluidized Bed Combustion This is suitable for uniform types of waste.
In this case, heat transfer is very fast & uniform.
Rotary kiln incinerator A rotary kiln incinerator is typically a slightly inclined rotating cylinder, with dimensions around 2 m in diameter and 10 m long, on a pilot plant scale.
There is a firebrick or refractory lining inside the cylinder.
The kiln can handle all sorts of wastes and hazardous wastes including solids, liquids, sludges and gases.
Partially combusted gases are often passed through a secondary combustion chamber for complete combustion.
By the nature of its design and construction, the three Ts of combustion are adhered here - good contact or residence time, fair degree of turbulence, and operating at a high enough temperature.
A schematic diagram is below : DRE (Destruction & Removal Efficiency) Destruction and removal efficiency (DRE) is the efficiency of the unit (kiln) in destruction and removal of a particular targeted organic compound.
In incineration DRE of above 99% is required.
DRE can be calculated by using the following formula - DRE= {(Win - Wout)/Win} x 100 Where, Win is mass feed rate of specific organic component to the incinerator Wout is mass emission rate of same organic component from the incinerator CE(Combustion Efficiency) Combustion efficiency is a measurement of how well the fuel being burned or is being utilized in the combustion process.
CE can be calculated by using the following formula - CE = {(CCO2 - CCO)/CCO2} x 100 Where, CCO2 is concentration of CO2 in the emitted gas CCO is concentration of CO in the emitted gas Q.
Find out CE(Combustion Efficiency) & DRE(Destruction & Removal Efficiency) of an incinerator from the following data - i) Input of phenolic waste is 18.2% & outlet phenol is 0.04% ii) Outlet gas concentration of CO is 0.1% & CO2 is 25.7% E-Waste Management E- waste or Electrical/Electronics waste is an environment killer.
Today's electronic gadgets, tomorrow's electronic wastes.
'E-waste' means waste from electrical and electronic equipments; whole or in part or rejects from their manufacturing and repair process which are intended to be discarded as waste.
E-waste is the term used to cover all items of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) and its parts that have been discarded by its owner as waste without the intent of re-use.
It is also referred to as WEEE (Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment) or electronic waste or e-scrap in different regions.
Electronic waste or e-waste describes discarded electrical or electronic devices & used electronics which are destined for reuse, resale, recycling, or disposal are also considered e - waste.
Informal processing of e-waste in developing countries can lead to adverse human health effects and environmental pollution.
It is the fastest growing portion of municipal waste & its management will prevent - Pollution of ground water.
Acidification of soil.
Emission of toxic fumes and gases.
Release of harmful gases into the air.
Sources/Types of E-Waste 1.
Waste generated from the products used for data processing such as computers, computer devices like monitor, speakers, keyboards, printers etc.
2.
Electronic devices used for entertainment like TV, DVDs, and CD players.
3.
Equipment or devices used for communication like phones, landline phones, fax etc.
4.
Household equipment's like vacuum cleaner, microwave ovens, washing machines, air conditioners etc.
5.
Audio, visual components such as VCRs, Stereo equipment etc.
Components of E-Waste EEE contains various materials including hazardous, valuable and scarce metals.
Common hazardous materials found in e-waste are heavy metals (such as mercury, lead, cadmium etc.)
E-Waste also contains many valuable materials (such as iron, copper, aluminum and plastics) and precious metals (like gold, silver, platinum and palladium) that can be recycled.
In fact, up to 60 elements from the periodic table can be found in complex electronics, and many of them are recoverable, though it is not always economic to do so presently.
From the resource perspective, e-waste is a potential "urban mine" that could provide a great amount of secondary resources for remanufacture and recycling.
E-Waste Composition (Approx.)
Monitors - 10% , Television -10%, Computers,Televisions, Fax, Printers etc.-15% , DVD/VCR Player, CD Player, Radio etc.- 15% , Refrigerators -20% , Washing Machine, Dryers, AC, Vacuum Cleaners etc.- 30% Is E-Waste hazardous?
E-Waste in itself is not hazardous.
However, the hazardous constituents present in the e- waste render it hazardous & when such wastes are dismantled & processed, they pose hazard to health and environment.
Reasons of E-waste generation Advancement in technology.
Changes in style, fashion and status Products nearing the end of their useful life Not taking precautions while using them How E-Waste handled currently in India & across the world?
Around 90% of the e-waste generated in India are handled by the informal sectors.
Incineration & Landfilling are used currently for majority of e waste.
Incineration i.e.
E- Waste are destroyed by burning which produces harmful gases.
Land filling which often leads to contaminate water and soil.
Very less percentage of e-waste is recycled RoHS and WEEE directives Companies selling electrical and electronic goods in the European Union must conform to the EU legislation for electrical and electronic equipment (EEE).
The two most important directives are: The Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE), which sets out the responsibilities of EEE producers for the collection and recycling of their products at the end of their lifecycle.
The Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive (RoHS), which bans the use of certain hazardous substances (such as lead, mercury, cadmium, hexavalent chromium and some polybrominated flame retardants) in EEE.
WEEE and RoHS Directives are complex pieces of legislation that apply to a similar range of products.
Each directive imposes obligations and outcomes that EU Member States must achieve.
However, neither directive dictates how the Member States must fulfill their obligations.
Therefore, when exporting to Europe, U.S. exporters need to be mindful that national rules for implementing each directive will differ from country to country.
Effects of e-waste on the environment Emissions from E-Waste create environmental damage.
Toxic chemicals from e-waste enter the "soil-crop- food pathway," and these are non-biodegradable and cause soil pollution.
E- Waste dumping yards and nearby places are polluted and cause health hazards.
Effects of e-waste on human body Elements present in e-waste affect human body in various ways.
Lead damage to central and peripheral nervous systems , blood systems and kidney damage and affects brain development of children.
Chromium leads to asthmatic bronchitis & DNA damage.
Cadmium leads to toxic irreversible effects on human health & accumulates in kidney and liver.
causing neural damage Mercury leads to chronic damage to brain and respiratory system.
Plastics including PVC - Burning produces dioxin which can cause reproductive and developmental problems, Immune system damage & Interfere with regulatory hormones etc.
Disposal of e-waste We should ensure safe disposal of these e-waste, because - 1.
Land fill disposal allows heavy metals to leach into ground water.
2.
Incineration makes hazardous materials pollute air.
3.
Disposal to water is dangerous and cause water and soil contamination.
Methods of Recycling Disassembly/Dismantling It is the systematic removal of components , parts or a group of parts or a subassembly from a product in e-waste.
Upgrading It includes comminuting(breaking) and separation of materials using mechanical/physical or metallurgical processing .
Materials recovery The materials are recovered by recycling facilities.
The plastic, glass, metals can be recovered by sorting them before mixing them with other waste.
Advantages of recycling e-waste Assets recovery Reduction of need for landfills Resale and reuse Creation of jobs E waste has emerged as one of the fastest growing waste streams world wide today.
Electronic gadgets, without proper disposal can cause environmental harm Reuse and Recycle are more beneficial than simple disposal.
How to Dispose E-waste Donate working older equipment to schools colleges or government entities in need.
If computers are out of order then return it to the manufacturers.
(HCL and Wipro in India has best take back service) Send waste goods to authorized recycling facility for proper disposal.
Probable Solutions Need for stringent health standards and environmental protection laws in India Extended producer responsibility Import of waste under license Producer-public-government cooperation Awareness program, following safer and efficient methods Choosing safer technology and cleaner substitute Monitoring of compliance rules Reduction of waste at source Recognition to the unorganized sectors in India.
Designing of products using environment friendly raw items can make a change.
Government should take steps to reduce e-waste disposal.
E- Waste (Management & Handling) Rules 2011 E- Waste (Management & Handling) Rules 2011 were notified in 2011 and had come into force since 1st May, 2012.
In order to ensure effective implementation of E-Waste Rules, Government of India modified the above one on 23.03.2016 which has been effective from 01-10-2016.
These rules are applicable to every producer, consumer or bulk consumer, collection centre, dismantler and recycler of e-waste involved in the manufacture, sale, purchase and processing of electrical and electronic equipment or components Two categories of electrical and electronic equipment namely - (i) IT and Telecommunication Equipment and (ii) Consumer Electricals and Electronics such as TVs, Washing Machines, Refrigerators Air Conditioners including fluorescent and other mercury containing lamps are covered under these Rules.
Waste Minimization Waste minimization is necessary to - i) Control pollution ii) Decrease the depletion rate of resources iii) Increase efficiency & hence profitability Elements of a waste minimization strategy It includes - i) Reduction at source ii) Recycle/ Reuse iii) Treatment iv) Disposal Waste Minimization Hierarchy Waste Reduction Techniques It has four major categories.
i) Inventory Management ii) Production Process Modification iii) Volume Reduction iv) Recovery i) Inventory Management Inventory means detailed list of articles, goods, property.
Inventory management includes - a) Inventory Control b) Materials Control ii) Production Process Modification It includes - a) Operational & maintenance procedures b) Materials Change c) Process equipment modification iii) Volume Reduction It includes - a) Source Segregation b) Concentration iv) Recovery It includes - a) on-site b) off-site Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) LCA is an useful environmental management tool.
Any product may have the following stages in it's lifecycle - i) Raw material acquisition ii) Bulk material processing iii) Engineered & specialty materials production iv) Manufacturing & assembly v) Uses & services vi) Retirement or expired vii) Disposal Phases of LCA i) Planning ii) Screening iii) Data Collection iv) Data treatment v) Evaluation Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is a process that requires consideration of the environment & public participation in the decision-making process of project development.
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is an important management tool for ensuring optimal use of natural resources for sustainable development.
Origin of EIA All ecosystems including human beings have threshold of tolerance for pollution & disturbances, beyond which the system may suffer anything from temporary upsets to complete destruction.
After second world war industrial & agricultural practices began to cause environmental damage which crossed the thresholds & lead to origin of EIA.
Stages of EIA The stages of EIA include - i) Screening ii) Scoping iii) EIS preparation iv) Review i) Screening By screening, it is to be decided which projects should be subject to environmental assessment.
ii) Scoping It is the process which defines the key or important issues that should be included in the environmental assessment.
iii) EIS preparation It is the scientific & objective analysis of the scale, significance & importance of impacts identified.
iv) Review The review panel guides the study & then advises the decision makers.
EIA Procedure There are generally three options for establishing EIA procedures.
i) Legislative Option i.e.
Legal approach ii) Middle Ground Option i.e.
within accepted planning & Procedures iii) Policy Option i.e.
within the administrative policy of government Project Screening for EIA The success of EIA depends on effective coverage & application of projects.
The various methods commonly used to select projects for EIA are - i) The use of positive (EIA required) & negative (EIA not required) list ii) The use of project criteria iii) The sensitive area criteria iv) Matrices v) Initial Environmental Evaluation(IEE) Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) IEE is a mini-EIA.
It requires a description of the environment & the development & the identification of environmental impacts those are anticipated.
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) EIS is a review document prepared for assessment in the EIA process.
Scope Studies of EIS Scoping is the procedure for establishing the TOR (Terms Of Reference) for the EIS.
In general, the objectives would be to identify the concerns & issues those need attention, necessary for public involvement & to prepare a detailed report for the investigation of specific issues associated with the development.
Preparation of an EIS One of the important elements of any project is the preparation of documentation to communicate the findings & conclusions of the study.
The value of the project is sharply diminished, if it's findings don't reach it's requisite results or intended audiences.
The important points to be considered are - i) Planning ii) Purpose iii) Audience iv) Structure Review of an EIS The functions of the review authority includes- i) The scope of the assessment i.e.
which projects should be subjected to a full or partial EIS.
ii) General or specific guidelines & advice on the methods of EIS.
iii) Formulate the TOR(Terms Of Reference) & initiate a detailed EIS.
iv) Ensure that, the EIS had been adequately completed within the TOR.
: ENVIRONMENTAL GRADIENTS, LAWS AND HUMAN HEALTH Environmental Gradients The environment or environmental factors are not similar over the globe or around the earth, giving rise to Environmental Gradients & due to which different species live in different places.
The physical, chemical factors like light, temperature & PH are known as conditions & the factors the organism actually uses like food, water, shelter are known as resources.
There is a global gradient change from the equator towards north or south.
This is a normally distributed bell-shaped curve, as the change in environmental conditions are gradual from equator towards north or south.
This curve is best described by a Gaussian (Normal) Distribution function, of the form f(x)=e-x2.
But, pollution can make it skew-shaped i.e.
sharp decrease of curve towards left or right from range of optimum.
Limiting Factors The resources in shortage of supply or the conditions over which the species has the smallest range of optimum will limit the species function & is called the limiting factor.
Ex:- Plant growth is strongly correlated with rain, but in arid region sufficient light is available, but water scarcity is there which is the limiting factor.
The tolerance of species to different environmental conditions or resources level vary from each other.
The favourable environmental factors to a species provide wide tolerance curve & broad range of optimum known as Eurytopic factors.
The unfavourable environmental factors to a species provide narrow tolerance curve & narrow range of optimum known as Stenotopic factors.
Regulatory Structure of Indian Env.
Laws MoEF - Ministry of Environment & Forest, Government of India CPCB - Central Pollution Control Board SPCB - State Pollution Control Board Indian Env.
Laws Water Laws Air Laws Central Govt.
MOEF CPCB Regional Offices SPCB State Dept.
of Env.
State Govt.
Wildlife & Forest Laws General Env.
Laws Water Laws The various env.
Laws on water are - 1) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act - 1974 2) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act rules - 1975 3) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Cess Act - 1977 4) The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, rules & amendments - 1992 Objectives of Water Law The objectives are - a) Prevention & control of water pollution b) Maintaining good quality of water c) Establishment of boards for the prevention & control of water pollution.
Air Laws The various env.
Laws on air are - 1) The air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act - 1981 2)The air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act rules - 1982 3) Atomic Energy Act - 1982 4) Motor Vehicles Act - 1988 Objectives of Air Law The objectives are - a) Prevention & control of air pollution b) Maintaining good quality of air c) Establishment of boards for the prevention & control of air pollution Wildlife & Forest Laws The various env.
Laws for wildlife & forest are- 1) The wildlife protection act - 1972 2) The wildlife protection act and amendments - 1991 3) The forest conservation act - 1980 4) The national forest policy - 1988 Objectives of Wildlife & Forest Laws The Objectives are - a) Protection & conservation of wildlife b) To preserve biodiversity c) To maintain essential ecological processes & life supporting systems.
General Env.
Laws The various laws in this category are - 1) The environmental protection act (EPA) - 1986 or Umbrella act 2) Hazardous waste (management & handling) rules - 1989 3) Biomedical waste (management & handling) rules - 1998 Objectives of Umbrella act Protection & improvement of environment & prevention of hazards to all living creatures.
Maintenance of harmonious relationship between human beings & their environment.
National Green Tribunal (NGT) The Indian govt.
established a National Green Tribunal in October 2010, headed by a former judge of the supreme court.
It is a tribunal exclusively dedicated to environmental issues.
This body was established by an act of parliament i.e.
National Green Tribunal Act of 2010, which will deal with all matters related to and arising out of environmental issues.
Eco-labelling of products An eco-label is used to mark a consumer product to indicate that it is environment- friendly with regards to its manufacture and use.
The label means that the product satisfies certain eco-friendly criteria laid down by the govt.
In1991, the govt.
of india launched its first eco- label called Eco-mark for easy identification of environment-friendly products.
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty or CTBT bans nuclear explosive testing for everyone, everywhere, in all environments.
CTBT makes very difficult for the countries to test or develop any nuclear weapon.
Some Important env.
Laws 1.
London Law of Sea (1962) is for prevention of sea pollution by oil.
2.Stockholm Agreement (1972) is for banning of ocean dumping wastes.
3.
Montreal Protocol (1987) is for eliminating CFCs & other ozone depleting substances.
4.
Rio Summit (1992) is with its objectives on sustainable development.
Kyoto Protocol The Kyoto Protocol (1992) was signed to try and limit Greenhouse gases, based on the premise that Global Warming is occurring due to increased Greenhouse gas emissions.
Paris Agreement The Paris Agreement of 2015 is to combat climate change and reduce the temperature rise to less than 2°C per century.
Environmental Institutions in India 1.
TERI(Tata Energy Research Institute) established in1974.
2.
NEERI(National Environment Engineering Research Institute) established in1958.
3.
EPTRI(Environmental Protection Training and Research Institute) established in 1990.
4.
IIFM(Indian Institute of Forest Management) established in 1982.
5.
WII(Wildlife Institution of India) established in 1982 etc.
Environmental movements in India 1.
Chipko movement started in 1973 to fight against deforestation.
2.
Silent valley movement started against setting up of a 75MW hydroelectric project to protect species of flora and fauna.
3.
Narmada Bachao Andolan started against a multipurpose project over river narmada by Baba Amte & Medha Patker.
4.
Baliyapal Movement started against acquiring cultivated lands for testing missiles etc.
Important Env.
Data The idea of sustainable development was defined for the first time by the world commission on environment and development in the year----- 1987 World Wildlife Fund was founded in ---- 1961 Earth day is observed on ---- April 22.
World environment day is celebrated every year on ----- 5th June.
First International Conference on environment was held on ---- June,1972.
Green Revolution The Green Revolution within India commenced in the early 1960s that led to an increase in food grain production, especially in Punjab, Haryana, and Uttar Pradesh.
Major milestones in this undertaking were the development of high-yielding varieties of wheat, and rust resistant strains of wheat.
Environment & Human Health Env.
Conditions Affecting Health i) Cleanliness of working area ii) Proper Lighting arrangement iii) Sufficient Temperature & Ventilation iv) Noise control V) Dust control Vi) Proper Working space & seating arrangements Factors affecting Health Physical factors like unhygienic living conditions, lack of education & overcrowding in small areas lead to health problems.
Chemical factors like improper or excess use of pesticides, herbicides and exposure to toxic, hazardous and radioactive substances lead to health problems.
Climate changing factors Diseases of human and Their Control Interaction of the agents like micro-organisms with the hosts like human beings and the environment can lead to various diseases.
Following three factors are important in this case.
sufficient strength of micro-organisms, lower immunity of the person & favouring environment for the transmission of agents Prevention can be done by - Enforcing immunization laws Providing health education to all Implementing good hand washing procedures.
Common Diseases Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver and often caused by viral infection.
Typhoid is an acute illness associated with fever can be caused by bacteria salmonella typhi & spread to other people by contaminated water.
Malaria is caused by a parasite called plasmodium which is transmitted to human beings by the bite of infected female anopheles species mosquitoes.
Dengue fever is an infection caused by dengue viruses.
Role of IT in Env.
& Human Health IT or Information Technology, is one of the fastest growing recent technologies & as technology is advancing, the role of IT is increasing day by day.
IT is used in the development & application of computational tools to acquire, store, organize, achieve, analyze & visualize various data which can be used for observation & protection of env.
& human health.
Role of IT in environment A large amount of information is easily available through remote sensing technology, GIS(Geographic Information System) & GPS(Global Positioning System) which can be used for various environmental purposes.
This data and knowledge about global environment can be used for mapping & monitoring various natural resources, thereby helping in various environmental studies.
GIS helps in detecting the existence of species of flora & fauna & counting the numbers of animals like tiger, elephant etc.
MoEF(Ministry of Env.
& Forest) & GOI(Govt.
of India) have established ENVIS (Environmental Information System) in 1982 in different organizations for providing important information.
Role of IT in Human Health IT helps in the development of biotechnology, gene engineering, research & developments in drug technologies.
IT plays a major role for a better human health in the fields like bioinformatics and online medical transcription.
IT can be used for audio, visual & data communications for medical consultation, nursing & medical education.
IT helps in spreading awareness about endemic, epidemic & communicable diseases.
Using Remote sensing & GIS, areas which are prone to diseases like malaria, dengue etc.
can be identified & accordingly steps for prevention or spreading of these diseases can be taken.
DISCLAIMER: The courseware material prepared may contain some text, figures and diagrams taken from google images and other readily available web sources.
The contents are prepared for the use of students in Silicon Institute of Technology as additional reference material, and not for any commercial purpose.
